references/obsidian/chapters/preprocessing.md, before:

- infer minimimal data types to minimize memory requirements. No data loss happening as required resolution for e. g., mantisse is considered.  (see [here](https://github.com/KarelZe/thesis/blob/main/notebooks/1.0-mb-data_preprocessing_mem_reduce.ipynb) and [here](https://www.kaggle.com/code/gemartin/load-data-reduce-memory-usage/notebook)(not used) or [here](https://www.kaggle.com/code/wkirgsn/fail-safe-parallel-memory-reduction) (not used))

**Filter:**
- What preprocessing have been applied. Minimal set of filters. See [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]
**Scaling:**
- TODO: Why do we perform feature scaling at all?
- TODO: Try out robust scaler, as data contains outliers. Robust scaler uses the median which is robust to outliers and iqr for scaling. 
- TODO: Try out different IQR thresholds and report impact. Similarily done here: https://machinelearningmastery.com/robust-scaler-transforms-for-machine-learning/
- We scale / normalize features to a $\left[-1,1\right]$  scale using statistics estimated on the training set to avoid data leakage. This is also recommended in [[@huyenDesigningMachineLearning]]. Interestingly, she also writes that empirically the interval $\left[-1,1\right]$ works better than $\left[0,1\right]$. Also read about this on stackoverflow for neural networks, which has to do with gradient calculation.
- Scale to an arbitrary range $\left[a,b\right]$ using the formula from [[@huyenDesigningMachineLearning]]:
$$
x^{\prime}=a+\frac{(x-\min (x))(b-a)}{\max (x)-\min (x)}
$$
- Feature scaling theoretically shouldn't be relevant for gradient boosting due to the way gbms select split points / not based on distributions. Also in my tests it didn't make much of a difference for gbms but for transformers. (see https://github.com/KarelZe/thesis/blob/main/notebooks/3.0b-mb-comparsion-transformations.ipynb) 
- [[@ronenMachineLearningTrade2022]] performed no feature scaling.
- [[@borisovDeepNeuralNetworks2022]] standardize numerical features and apply ordinal encoding to categorical features, but pass to the model which ones are categorical features. 
- [[@gorishniyRevisitingDeepLearning2021]] (p. 6) use quantile transformation, which is similar to the robust scaler, see https://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/preprocessing/plot_all_scaling.html#sphx-glr-auto-examples-preprocessing-plot-all-scaling-pyf) Note that [[@grinsztajnWhyTreebasedModels2022]] only applied quantile transformations to all features, thus not utilize special implementations for categorical variables.
**Class imbalances:**
- Data set is slightly imbalanced. Would not treat, as difference is only minor and makes it harder. Could make my final decision based on [[@japkowiczClassImbalanceProblem2002]] [[@johnsonSurveyDeepLearning2019]]. Some nice background is also in [[@huyenDesigningMachineLearning]]
- [[@huyenDesigningMachineLearning]] discusses different sampling strategies. -> Could make sense to use stratified sampling or weighted sampling. With weighted sampling we could give classes that are notoriously hard to learn e. g., large trades or index options.

**imputation:**
- Best do a large-scale comparsion as already done for some transformations in  https://github.com/KarelZe/thesis/blob/main/notebooks/3.0b-mb-comparsion-transformations.ipynb. My feeling is that differences are neglectable. 
- Different imputation appraoches are listed in [[@perez-lebelBenchmarkingMissingvaluesApproaches2022]]. Basic observation use approaches that can inherently handle missing values. This is a good tradeoff between performance and prediction quality.
- simple overview for imputation https://towardsdatascience.com/6-different-ways-to-compensate-for-missing-values-data-imputation-with-examples-6022d9ca0779
- Refer to previous chapters e. g., on gradient boosting, where handling of missing values should be captured.

Commit message:

Pre-write feature engineering chapter 🪛 (#88)
Adresses #10.

references/obsidian/chapters/preprocessing.md, after:

- infer minimimal data types to minimize memory requirements. No data loss happening as required resolution for e. g., mantisse is considered.  (see [here](https://github.com/KarelZe/thesis/blob/main/notebooks/1.0-mb-data_preprocessing_mem_reduce.ipynb) and [here](https://www.kaggle.com/code/gemartin/load-data-reduce-memory-usage/notebook)(not used) or [here](https://www.kaggle.com/code/wkirgsn/fail-safe-parallel-memory-reduction) (not used))

**Filter:**
- What preprocessing have been applied. Minimal set of filters. See [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]

**Class imbalances:**
- Data set is slightly imbalanced. Would not treat, as difference is only minor and makes it harder. Could make my final decision based on [[@japkowiczClassImbalanceProblem2002]] [[@johnsonSurveyDeepLearning2019]]. Some nice background is also in [[@huyenDesigningMachineLearning]]
- [[@huyenDesigningMachineLearning]] discusses different sampling strategies. -> Could make sense to use stratified sampling or weighted sampling. With weighted sampling we could give classes that are notoriously hard to learn e. g., large trades or index options.

- To evaluate the performance of trade classification algoriths the true side of the trade needs to be known. To match LiveVol data, the total customer sell volume or total or total customer buy volume has to match with the transactions in LiveVol. Use unique key of trade date, expiration date, strike price, option type, and root symbol to match the samples. (see [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]) Notice, that this leads to an imperfect reconstruction!
- The approach of [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]] matches the LiveVol data set, only if there is a matching volume on buyer or seller side. Results in 40 % reconstruction rate
- **fuzzy matching:** e. g., match volumes, even if there are small deviations in the volumes e. g. 5 contracts. Similar technique used for time stamps in [[@savickasInferringDirectionOption2003]]. Why might this be a bad idea?
- Discuss that only a portion of data can be reconstructed. Previous works neglected the unlabeled part. 
- Discuss how previously unused data could be used. This maps to the notion of supervised and semi-supervised learning
- Pseudo Labeling?
- We assign sells the label `0` and buys the label `1`. This has the advantage that the calculation from the logloss doesn't require any mapping. Easy interpretation as probability.
