
## Text 
Additionally, [[@vaswaniAttentionAllYou2017]] (p. 3) employ *layer normalization* around each sub-layer after adding residual connections ([[🔗Residual connections]]). The specific configuration is referred to as *Post Layer Normalization* (Post-LN) derived from the arrangement of the normalization layer.

Layer normalization is used for normalizing the activations of the sub-layer to stabilize and accelerate the training of the network ([[@baLayerNormalization2016]])(p. 2). In Transformers the normalization statistics are calculated separately for <mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">every instance</mark>, which guarantees scalability across different batch sizes. For a vector $\boldsymbol{e}\in \mathbb{R}^{d_e}$ the normalized output is given by: $\widehat{\boldsymbol{e}}=\frac{e-m}{\sqrt{v}} \odot \boldsymbol{\gamma}+\boldsymbol{\beta}$, calculated with the statistics $\boldsymbol{m} = \sum_{i=1}^{d_{\mathrm{e}}} e[i] / d_{\mathrm{e}}$ and $v = \sum_{i=1}^{d_{\mathrm{e}}}(e[i]-\boldsymbol{m})^2 / d_{\mathrm{e}}$ and the scale $\boldsymbol{\gamma}$ and bias $\boldsymbol{\beta}$ parameters. 

Different orders of the sub-layers, residual connection and layer normalization in a Transformer layer lead to variants of Transformer architectures. While *post layer norm* has has shown to slightly improve the performance of the Transformer, it leads to a brittle optimization. 

1. Why do we use layer norm and skip connections at all?
2. Are they vital for the overall architecture?
3. How do the two most commonly used variants look like?
4. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each approach?
5. What complicates training?
6. What is required for *post-norm*?
7. Give the formula
8. Visualize!

We'll come back to this observation in Chapter [[💡Training of models (supervised)]]. 

## Notes

Each Transformer block can be expressed as: XA = LayerNorm(MultiheadAttention(X, X)) + X XB = LayerNorm(PositionFFN(XA)) + XA where X is the input of the Transformer block and XB is the output of the Transformer block. Note that the MultiheadAttention() function accepts two argument tensors, one for query and the other for key-values. If the first argument and second argument is the same input tensor, this is the MultiheadSelfAttention mechanism.” ([Tay et al., 2022, p. 4](zotero://select/library/items/SLWQVGHF)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/PDDJFS9K?page=4&annotation=9YTWUXLT))([[@tayEfficientTransformersSurvey2022]])

“<mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">For Transformer, it is not easy to train stacked layers on neither the encoder-side nor the decoderside. Stacking all these sub-layers prevents the efficient information flow through the network, and probably leads to the failure of training. Residual connections and layer normalization are adopted for a solution. Let F be a sub-layer in encoder or decoder, and θl be the parameters of the sub-layer.</mark>  ([[@wangLearningDeepTransformer2019]])

<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">“2.2 On the Importance of Pre-Norm for Deep Residual Network The situation is quite different when we switch to deeper models. More specifically, we find that prenorm is more efficient for training than post-norm if the model goes deeper. This can be explained by seeing back-propagation which is the core process to obtain gradients for parameter update. Here we take a stack of L sub-layers as an example. Let E be the loss used to measure how many errors occur in system prediction, and xL be the output of the topmost sub-layer. For post-norm Transformer, given a sub-layer l, the differential of E with respect to xl can be computed by the chain rule, and we have ∂E ∂xl = ∂E ∂xL × L−1 ∏ k=l ∂LN(yk) ∂yk × L−1 ∏ k=l ( 1 + ∂F (xk; θk) ∂xk ) (5) where ∏L−1 k=l ∂ LN(yk ) ∂yk means the backward pass of the layer normalization, and ∏L−1 k=l (1 + ∂F(xk;θk) ∂xk ) means the backward pass of the sub-layer with the residual connection. Likewise, we have the gradient for pre-norm 4: ∂E ∂xl = ∂E ∂xL × ( 1+ L−1 ∑ k=l ∂F (LN(xk); θk) ∂xl ) (6) Obviously, Eq. (6) establishes a direct way to pass error gradient ∂E ∂xL from top to bottom. Its merit lies in that the number of product items on the right side does not depend on the depth of the stack. In contrast, Eq. (5) is inefficient for passing gradients back because the residual connection is not 3We need to add an additional function of layer normalization to the top layer to prevent the excessively increased value caused by the sum of unnormalized output. 4For a detailed derivation, we refer the reader to Appendix A. a bypass of the layer normalization unit (see Figure 1(a)). Instead, gradients have to be passed through LN(·) of each sub-layer. It in turn introduces term ∏L−1 k=l ∂ LN(yk ) ∂yk into the right hand side of Eq. (5), and poses a higher risk of gradient vanishing or exploring if L goes larger. This was confirmed by our experiments in which we successfully trained a pre-norm Transformer system with a 20-layer encoder on the WMT English-German task, whereas the post-norm Transformer system failed to train for a deeper encoder (Section 5.1).” ([Wang et al., 2019, p. 1812](zotero://select/library/items/BJ43W6ZQ)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/HVE8Q5EQ?page=3&annotation=AXKHQZJR)) [[@wangLearningDeepTransformer2019]]</mark>

<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">“Residual connections (He et al., 2016a) were first introduced to facilitate the training of deep convolutional networks, where the output of the `-th layer F` is summed with its input: x`+1 = x` + F`(x`). (1) The identity term x` is crucial to greatly extending the depth of such networks (He et al., 2016b). If one were to scale x` by a scalar λ`, then the contribution of x` to the final layer FL is (∏L−1 i=` λi)x`. For deep networks with dozens or even hundreds of layers L, the term ∏L−1 i=` λi becomes very large if λi > 1 or very small if  for enough i. When backpropagating from the last layer L back to `, these multiplicative terms can cause exploding or vanishing gradients, respectively. Therefore they fix λi = 1, keeping the total residual path an identity map.” (Nguyen and Salazar, 2019, p. 2) [[@nguyenTransformersTearsImproving2019]]</mark>

<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">layer norm is the same as batch norm except that it normalizes the feature dimension ([[@zhangDiveDeepLearning2021]] p. 423)</mark>


<mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">“Training state-of-the-art, deep neural networks is computationally expensive. One way to reduce the training time is to normalize the activities of the neurons.” (Ba et al., 2016, p. 1)

“In this paper, we transpose batch normalization into layer normalization by computing the mean and variance used for normalization from all of the summed inputs to the neurons in a layer on a single training case” (Ba et al., 2016, p. 1)

“This paper introduces layer normalization, a simple normalization method to improve the training speed for various neural network models. Unlike batch normalization, the proposed method directly estimates the normalization statistics from the summed inputs to the neurons within a hidden layer so the normalization does not introduce any new dependencies between training cases. We show that layer normalization works well for RNNs and improves both the training time and the generalization performance of several existing RNN models.” (Ba et al., 2016, p. 2)
</mark>

<mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">The layer normalization computes the average and standard deviation of the output activations of a given sublayer and normalizes them accordingly. This guarantees that the input yt of the following sublayer is well conditioned, i.e., that yT t 1 = 0 and yT t yt = √d.” ([Sukhbaatar et al., 2019, p. 3](zotero://select/library/items/A7XG93GC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/I76F65M4?page=3&annotation=AZJKFERG))</mark>

<mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">“the impact of the layer normalization positions [32, 33]. There are currently two major layer normalization positions in Transformers: Pre-Layer Normalization (Pre-LN) and Post-Layer Normalization (Post-LN). Pre-LN applies the layer normalization to an input for each sub-layer, and Post-LN places the layer normalization after each residual connection. The original Transformer [28] employs PostLN. However, recent studies often suggest using Pre-LN [32, 2, 5] because the training in Post-LN with deep Transformers (e.g., ten or more layers) often becomes unstable, resulting in useless models. Figure 1 shows an actual example; loss curves of training 18L-18L Transformer encoder-decoders on a widely used WMT English-to-German machine translation dataset. Here, XL-Y L represents the number of layers in encoder and decoder, where X and Y correspond to encoder and decoder, respectively. These figures clearly show that 18L-18L Post-LN Transformer encoder-decoder fails to train the model. However, in contrast, Liu et al. [13] reported that Post-LN consistently achieved better performance than Pre-LN in the machine translation task when they used 6L-6L (relatively shallow) Transformers.” ([Takase et al., 2022, p. 2](zotero://select/library/items/9867KZ4B)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/JBR6QM9N?page=2&annotation=IGTZ6SLR)) ([[@takaseLayerNormalizationsResidual2022]])</mark>

<mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">“Residual connection and layer normalization Besides the two sub-layers described above, the residual connection and layer normalization are also key components to the Transformer. For any vector v, the layer normalization is computed as LayerNorm(v) = γ v−μ σ + β, in which μ, σ are the mean and standard deviation of the elements in v, i.e., μ = 1 d ∑d k=1 vk and σ2 = 1 d ∑d k=1(vk − μ)2. Scale γ and bias vector β are parameters” (Xiong et al., 2020, p. 3)
</mark>

<mark style="background: #CACFD9A6;">Update residual stream, refine inputs from previous layers? See [[@elhage2021mathematical]]</mark>

<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">“First, we apply layer normalization before the selfattention and feedforward blocks instead of after. This small change has been unanimously adopted by all current Transformer implementations because it leads to more effective training (Baevski and Auli, 2019; Xiong et al., 2020).” ([Narang et al., 2021, p. 4](zotero://select/library/items/LMH6LKL2)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/EA82UUN6?page=4&annotation=K6BH3JER))</mark>

<mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">“Inspired by He et al. (2016b), we apply LAYERNORM immediately before each sublayer (PRENORM): x\`+1 = x\` + F\`(LAYERNORM(x\`)). (3) This is cited as a stabilizer for Transformer training (Chen et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019) and is already implemented in popular toolkits (Vaswani et al., 2018; Ott et al., 2019; Hieber et al., 2018), though not necessarily used by their default recipes. Wang et al. (2019) make a similar argument to motivate the success of PRENORM in training very deep Transformers. Note that one must append an additional normalization after both encoder and decoder so their outputs are appropriately scaled.” ([Nguyen and Salazar, 2019, p. 2](zotero://select/library/items/EDLX35I6)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/2PAADYR7?page=2&annotation=HGX5V3N6))</mark>

<mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">“Our analysis starts from the observation: the original Transformer (referred to as Post-LN) is less robust than its Pre-LN variant2 (Baevski and Auli, 2019; Xiong et al., 2019; Nguyen and Salazar, 2019).  We recognize that gradient vanishing issue is not the direct reason causing such difference, since fixing this issue alone cannot stabilize PostLN training. It implies that, besides unbalanced gradients, there exist other factors influencing model training greatly 
” (Liu et al., 2020, p. 1) [[@liuUnderstandingDifficultyTraining2020]]</mark>

<mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">“Different orders of the sub-layers, residual connection and layer normalization in a Transformer layer lead to variants of Transformer architectures. One of the original and most popularly used architecture for the Transformer and BERT (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2018) follows “selfattention (FFN) sub-layer → residual connection → layer normalization”, which we call the Transformer with PostLayer normalization (Post-LN Transformer), as illustrated in Figure 1.” ([Xiong et al., 2020, p. 3](zotero://select/library/items/JKKHGAAC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/2E5NZTRP?page=3&annotation=NNLEUS79)) [[@xiongLayerNormalizationTransformer2020]]</mark>

<mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">“We conjecture this has caused past convergence failures (Popel and Bojar, 2018; Shazeer and Stern, 2018), with LAYERNORMs in the residual path acting similarly to λi 6= 1; furthermore, warmup was needed to let LAYERNORM safely adjust scale during early parts of training.” (Nguyen and Salazar, 2019, p. 2)</mark>

<mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">Example for brittle training of Transformers with Adam [[@shazeerAdafactorAdaptiveLearning2018]]</mark>

<mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">“As in Figure 7, at initialization, a Pre-LN layer has roughly the same dependency on its residual branch and any previous layer, whereas a Post-LN layer has a stronger dependency on its residual branch (more discussions are elaborated in Section 4.1). We find that strong dependencies of Post-LN amplify fluctuations brought by parameter changes and destabilize the training (as in Theorem 2 and Figure 4). Besides, the loose reliance on residual branches in Pre-LN generally limits the algorithm’s potential and often produces inferior models.” (Liu et al., 2020, p. 2)</mark>

<mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">
“As mentioned earlier, the Transformer architecture makes use of layer normalization and skip connections. The former normalizes each input in the batch to have zero mean and unity variance. Skip connections pass a tensor to the next layer of the model without processing and add it to the processed tensor.” ([Tunstall, 2022, p. 71](zotero://select/library/items/HYPN9IJ9)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TVF29AAM?page=95&annotation=TF8RNHLQ))
</mark>

<mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">“Post layer normalization This is the arrangement used in the Transformer paper; it places layer normalization in between the skip connections. This arrangement is tricky to train from scratch as the gradients can diverge. For this reason, you will often see a concept known as learning rate warm-up, where the learning rate is gradually increased from a small value to some maximum value during training.” ([Tunstall, 2022, p. 71](zotero://select/library/items/HYPN9IJ9)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TVF29AAM?page=95&annotation=F4AN27WP))
</mark>

<mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">“Pre layer normalization This is the most common arrangement found in the literature; it places layer normalization within the span of the skip connections. This tends to be much more stable during training, and it does not usually require any learning rate warm-up.” ([Tunstall, 2022, p. 71](zotero://select/library/items/HYPN9IJ9)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TVF29AAM?page=95&annotation=4RWZA2EP))</mark>

<mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">“To train a Transformer however, one usually needs a carefully designed learning rate warm-up stage, which is shown to be crucial to the final performance but will slow down the optimization and bring more hyperparameter tunings. In this paper, we first study theoretically why the learning rate warm-up stage is essential and show that the location of layer normalization matters. Specifically, we prove with mean field theory that at initialization, for the original-designed Post-LN Transformer, which places the layer normalization between the residual blocks, the expected gradients of the parameters near the output layer are large. Therefore, using a large learning rate on those gradients makes the training unstable. The warm-up stage is practically helpful for avoiding this problem. On the other hand, our theory also shows that if the layer normalization is put inside the residual blocks (recently proposed as Pre-LN Transformer), the gradients are well-behaved at initialization. This motivates us to remove the warm-up stage for the training of Pre-LN Transformers. We show in our experiments that Pre-LN Transformers without the warm-up stage can reach comparable results with baselines while requiring significantly less training time and hyper-parameter tuning on a wide range of applications.” ([Xiong et al., 2020, p. 1](zotero://select/library/items/JKKHGAAC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/2E5NZTRP?page=1&annotation=WV34HEM3)) [[@xiongLayerNormalizationTransformer2020]]
</mark>
