references/obsidian/chapters/👶Introduction.md, before:

- Limit to view, yet theoretically promising techniques as derived in [[#^d8f019]]
- "The validity of many ecomnomic studies hinges on the ability to accuractely classify trades as buyer or seller-initiated." (found in [[@odders-whiteOccurrenceConsequencesInaccurate2000]])
- trade site classification matters for several reasons, market liqudity measures, short sells, study of bid-ask-spreads.
- Where is trade side classification applied? Why is it important? Do citation search.
- Repeat in short the motivation
- Outpeformance in similar / other domains
- Obtain probabilities for further analysis

- Crisp sentence of what ML is and why it is promising here. 

- goal is to outperform existing classical approaches

- [[@rosenthalModelingTradeDirection2012]] lists fields where trade classification is used and what the impact of wrongly classified trades is.
- The extent to which inaccurate trade classification biases empirical research dependes on whether misclassifications occur randomly or systematically [[@theissenTestAccuracyLee2000]].
- There is no common sense of who is the iniator of a trade. See discussion in [[@odders-whiteOccurrenceConsequencesInaccurate2000]]
- over time proposed methods applied more filters / got more sophisticated but didn't substainly improve im some cases. See e. g., [[@finucaneDirectTestMethods2000]] Time to switch to another paradigma and let the data speak?
- Works that require trade side classification in option markets:
	- [[@muravyevOrderFlowExpected2016]]
	- [[@huDoesOptionTrading2014]]
- and its consequences are an important, but understudied, cause for concern.
- Commonly stock trade classifcation algorithms are used

Commit message:

Improve notes on tick rule, quote rule, LR algorithm, and EMO rule💸 (#144)
Adresses #10 .

references/obsidian/chapters/👶Introduction.md, after:

- Limit to view, yet theoretically promising techniques as derived in [[#^d8f019]]
- "The validity of many economic studies hinges on the ability to acurately classify trades as buyer or seller-initiated." (found in [[@odders-whiteOccurrenceConsequencesInaccurate2000]])
- trade site classification matters for several reasons, market liquidity measures, short sells, study of bid-ask-spreads.
- Where is trade side classification applied? Why is it important? Do citation search.
- Repeat in short the motivation
- Outperformance in similar / other domains
- Obtain probabilities for further analysis

- Crisp sentence of what ML is and why it is promising here. 

- goal is to outperform existing classical approaches

- [[@rosenthalModelingTradeDirection2012]] lists fields where trade classification is used and what the impact of wrongly classified trades is.
- The extent to which inaccurate trade classification biases empirical research depends on whether misclassifications occur randomly or systematically [[@theissenTestAccuracyLee2000]].
- There is no common sense of who is the initiatiator of a trade. See discussion in [[@odders-whiteOccurrenceConsequencesInaccurate2000]]
- over time proposed methods applied more filters / got more sophisticated but didn't substantialy improve im some cases. See e. g., [[@finucaneDirectTestMethods2000]] Time to switch to another paradigm and let the data speak?
- Works that require trade side classification in option markets:
	- [[@muravyevOrderFlowExpected2016]]
	- [[@huDoesOptionTrading2014]]
- and its consequences are an important, but understudied, cause for concern.
- Commonly stock trade classification algorithms are used


- “Who is buying and who is selling are important elements in determining the information content of trades, the order imbalance and inventory accumulation of liquidity providers, the price impact of large trades, the effective spread, and many other related questions. Unfortunately, commonly available high frequency databases do not provide in? formation on trade direction. Consequently, empirical researchers have relied on trade direction algorithms to classify trades as buyer or seller motivated.” ([[@ellisAccuracyTradeClassification2000]], p. 529)
- “The Berkeley Options Data Base does not classify trades as buyer-initiated or seller-initiated. This classification must be done using quote and trade information.” ([Easley et al., 1998, p. 453](zotero://select/library/items/593W67XA)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZBEQIUNK?page=23&annotation=GXHQMKIW))
