references/obsidian/chapters/💡Training of models (supervised).md, before:


## Transformer
[[🤖Training of the Transformer]]

## Categoricals
- The problem of high number of categories is called a high cardinality problem of categoricals see e. g., [[@huangTabTransformerTabularData2020]]
- To inform our models which features are categorical, we pass the index the index of categorical features and the their cardinality to the models.
- Discuss cardinality of categoricals.
- strict assumption as we have out-of-vocabulary tokens e. g., unseen symbols like "TSLA".  (see done differently here https://keras.io/examples/structured_data/tabtransformer/)
- Idea: Instead of assign an unknown token it could help assign to map the token to random vector. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/45495190/initializing-out-of-vocabulary-oov-tokens
- Idea: reduce the least frequent root symbols.
- Apply an idea similar to sentence piece. Here, the number of words in vocabulary is fixed https://github.com/google/sentencepiece. See repo for paper / algorithm.
- For explosion in parameters also see [[@tunstallNaturalLanguageProcessing2022]]. Could apply their reasoning (calculate no. of parameters) for my work. 
- KISS. Dimensionality is probably not so high, that it can not be handled. It's much smaller than common corpi sizes. Mapping to 'UKNWN' character. -> Think how this can be done using the current `sklearn` implementation.
- **Solutions:** 
	- Use a linear projection: https://www.kaggle.com/code/limerobot/dsb2019-v77-tr-dt-aug0-5-3tta/notebook
	- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Additive_smoothing

Commit message:

Add notes on embeddings for tabular data 🧲

references/obsidian/chapters/💡Training of models (supervised).md, after:


## Transformer
[[🤖Training of the Transformer]]


[[@somepalliSAINTImprovedNeural2021]] use logistic regression. I really like the fact they also compare a simple logistic regression to these models, because if you’re not able to perform notably better relative to the simplest model one could do, then why would we care? The fact that logistic regression is at times competitive and even beats boosting/SAINT methods occasionally gives me pause though. Perhaps some of these data are not sufficiently complex to be useful in distinguishing these methods? It is realistic though. While it’s best not to assume as such, sometimes a linear model is appropriate given the features and target at hand.


## Categoricals
- The problem of high number of categories is called a high cardinality problem of categoricals see e. g., [[@huangTabTransformerTabularData2020]]
- To inform our models which features are categorical, we pass the index the index of categorical features and the their cardinality to the models.
- Discuss cardinality of categoricals.
- strict assumption as we have out-of-vocabulary tokens e. g., unseen symbols like "TSLA".  (see done differently here https://keras.io/examples/structured_data/tabtransformer/)
- Idea: Instead of assign an unknown token it could help assign to map the token to random vector. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/45495190/initializing-out-of-vocabulary-oov-tokens
- Idea: reduce the least frequent root symbols.
- Apply an idea similar to sentence piece. Here, the number of words in vocabulary is fixed https://github.com/google/sentencepiece. See repo for paper / algorithm.
- For explosion in parameters also see [[@tunstallNaturalLanguageProcessing2022]]. Could apply their reasoning (calculate no. of parameters) for my work. 
- KISS. Dimensionality is probably not so high, that it can not be handled. It's much smaller than common corpi sizes. Mapping to 'UKNWN' character. -> Think how this can be done using the current `sklearn` implementation.
- **Solutions:** 
	- Use a linear projection: https://www.kaggle.com/code/limerobot/dsb2019-v77-tr-dt-aug0-5-3tta/notebook
	- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Additive_smoothing
