 Supply of sufficient background information  Definition of the (general) problem  State of knowledge about the problem (in detail)  Carving out the gap of research and development  Objectives of the work/paper  Overall purpose/goal: to fill the gap in R&D  Stating specific objectives: as objectives, as hypotheses or as research questions.  Our Recommendations: Begin the chapter “Introduction” with the problem statement. Set the context of your research and capture the reader's attention. Explain the background of your study, starting from a broad perspective narrowing it down to your own research goal. Go into more detail when presenting the state of knowledge to date. Review what is known about your research topic as far as it is relevant. Then, develop the research or development gap from the existing knowledge. This is an important part, because your research work starts with the “gap” and should result in new knowledge or new findings. Therefore, the goal of your research work is to close the gap which you have discovered. Then, specify your objectives. The easiest way is to set some special research questions, which you will directly answer later in the respective chapter “Conclusion”. Thus, you do not mix up/confuse this part with working steps. For example, “to make life cycle assessment”, “to make soil analysis” are working steps, and not objectives as such


**What is the problem?**
- The validity of many economic studies hinges on the ability to properly classify trades as buyer or seller-initiated. ([[@odders-whiteOccurrenceConsequencesInaccurate2000]])
- “Such indication made directly from the data is nowadays in mostly cases inaccessible, since the majority of public databases including transaction data do not contain information of trade initiators and trade direction.” ([[@nowakAccuracyTradeClassification2020]], p. 65)
- “Who is buying and who is selling are important elements in determining the information content of trades, the order imbalance and inventory accumulation of liquidity providers, the price impact of large trades, the effective spread, and many other related questions. Unfortunately, commonly available high frequency databases do not provide in? formation on trade direction. Consequently, empirical researchers have relied on trade direction algorithms to classify trades as buyer or seller motivated.” ([[@ellisAccuracyTradeClassification2000]], p. 529)
- “The Berkeley Options Data Base does not classify trades as buyer-initiated or seller-initiated. This classification must be done using quote and trade information.” ([Easley et al., 1998, p. 453](zotero://select/library/items/593W67XA)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZBEQIUNK?page=23&annotation=GXHQMKIW))
- Despite the overall importance for option research, the trade initiator is commonly not provided and inferred using simple simple heuristics.
- Commonly heuristics were proposed for the stock market and are thouroughly teste

**Applications that require the trade initiator**
- From expose: Determining whether a trade is buyer or seller-initiated is ubiquitous for many problems in option research. Typical applications include the study of option demand [[@garleanuDemandBasedOptionPricing2009]] or the informational content of option trading [[@huDoesOptionTrading2014]] or [[@panInformationOptionVolume2006]]. Despite the overall importance for empirical research, the true initiator of the trade is often missing in option data sets and must be inferred using trade classification algorithms[[@easleyDiscerningInformationTrade2016]].
- From Grauer paper. Make sure examples do not overlap! Particularly, the trade direction is required to determine the information content of trades, the price impact of customer transactions, as well as the order imbalance and inventory accumulation of intermediaries. Important examples are studies on option demand (Gârleanu, Pedersen, and Poteshman (2009); Muravyev and Ni (2020)), option order flow (Muravyev (2016)), and option price pressures (Goyenko and Zhang (2021)).
- trade site classification matters for several reasons, market liquidity measures, short sells, study of bid-ask-spreads.
- Option order flow [[@muravyevOrderFlowExpected2016]]
- Order imbalances [[@huDoesOptionTrading2014]] (option order flow contains valuable information about the underlying stock)
- Find some more (...)
- Possible application of the lee-ready algorithm -> market sideness? ([[@sarkarMarketSidednessInsights2023]])
- “The information which party to a trade is a trade initiator is indispensable to specify the trade indicator models used to investigate the intraday price formation (Glosten and Harris 1988; Huang and Stoll 1997; Madhavan 1992; McGroarty et al. 2007; Hagströmer et al. 2016). Moreover, the identification of party to a trade which is responsible for initiating a particular transaction is advantageous to clarify many important issues related to the market microstructure. First of all, it may be used to ascertain the information content of trades. Second, it can help to figure out the magnitude of the order imbalance as well as the proportion of the inventory accumulation made by the liquidity suppliers. Third, it helps to assess the price impact of large in volume transactions as well as the magnitude of effective spread (Ellis et al. 2000).” ([[@nowakAccuracyTradeClassification2020]], 2020, p. 66)
- “Various papers illustrate the consequences of inaccurate trade classification in empirical finance. For example, Boehmer et al. (2007) show analytically and empirically that inaccurate classification of trades leads to downward-biased PIN (probability of informed trade) estimates and that the magnitude of the bias is related to a security’s trading intensity. Using two separate periods around the NYSE’s change to a tick size of $1/16 in June 1997, Peterson and Sirri (2003) report that actual execution costs are overstated by up to 17% using effective spread estimates that incorporate errors in trade direction and benchmark quote assignments, and that the highest biases occur for small trades and for trades of larger firms.” ([[@aktasTradeClassificationAccuracy2014]], 2014, p. 260)
- “Much of market microstructure analysis is built on the concept that traders learn from market data. Some of this learning is prosaic, such as inferring buys and sells from trade execution. Other learning is more complex, such as inferring underlying new information from trade executions. In this paper, we investigate the general issue of how to discern underlying information from trading data. We examine the accuracy and efficacy of three methods for classifying trades: the tick rule, the aggregated tick rule, and the bulk volume classification methodology. Our results indicate that the tick rule is a reasonably good classifier of the aggressor side of trading, both for individual trades and in aggregate. Bulk volume is shown to also be reasonably accurate for classifying buy and sell trades, but, unlike the tick-based approaches, it can also provide insight into other proxies for underlying information.” ([Easley et al., 2016, p. 284](zotero://select/library/items/X6ZNZ556)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/HPC6KBMF?page=16&annotation=VC98DC2N))
- Despite the second observation, the trade direction of the liquidity demanding side of the order flow remains a popular indicator of informed trading (see, e.g., Bernile et al., 2016; Chordia et al., 2017; Hu, 2014, 2017; Muravyev, 2016) the appropriateness of which is context specific but particularly sensible when informed traders demand immediacy for their transactions in order to gain most from their informational advantage. In these cases, studies rely on the classical classification algorithms, most prominently the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm, to obtain the indicator of the liquidity demanding side of the transaction, the trade initiator, as do traditional measures of market liquidity (Huang and Stoll, 1996; Fong et al., 2017). (https://dauphine.psl.eu/fileadmin/mediatheque/chaires/fintech/articles/1_UPDATE_Simon_Jurkatis_YFS2019.pdf)
- Empirical market microstructure research often requires knowledge about whether a transaction was initiated by a buyer or a seller. Examples include, but are not limited to, accurate calculation of effective spreads (Lightfood et. al. 1999), the identification of the components of the bid-ask spreads using methods based on a trade indicator variable (Huang / Stoll 1997) and the estimation of certain structural microstructure models (e.g. Easley et. al. 1996). (found in [[@theissenTestAccuracyLee2000]])
- The importance of identifying liquidity demanders in studies of financial markets is well established, given that demanding liquidity is known to require the liquidity demander to pay a fee (Grossman and Miller, 1988). Indeed, much work has gone into accurately identifying the initiators of trades (i.e., liquidity demanders) in equity markets (Lee and Ready, 1991)—with Easley, de Prado and O’Hara (2016) accurately inferring trade initiation in modern equity markets. Yet, as will be elaborated in what follows, methods used for assigning trade initiation in equity markets are not sufficiently applicable to OTC markets—and thus, perhaps surprisingly, liquidity demanders (vs. providers) are typically not identified in these markets.

## Contributions

Our work makes the following contributions:
1. We employ state-of-the-art supervised algorithms i.~e., gradient-boosted trees and transformer networks to the problem of trade classification. Our work is the first to extensively benchmark tree-based ensembles against deep learning-based, and rules-based approaches.  Our emphasis is on a fair comparison with respect to comparable data requirements and hyperparameter tuning.  Our results show a clear outperformance of 
2. In a real-world setting, labelled trades, or trades for which the true initiator is known, are sparse, but unlabelled trades are abundant. Motivated by this consideration, we  extend our classifiers to learn on both labelled and unlabelled data through pre-training and self-training procedures and study the impact on classification accuracy. Specifically, we can show, that pre-training of Transformers improves accuracy on gls-ise data.
3. We strive to understand which features are most predictive. Through a game-theoretic approach, our work is the first to consistently attribute the performance of rule-based trade classification and machine learning-based predictors to individual features. We find that, both paradigms share a common set of features, but machine learning-based classifiers attain higher performance gains and thus better exploit the data. By probing and visualising the attention mechanism inside the Transformer, we can further strengthen the link to rule-based classification and uncover that the *learned* rules mimic *classical* rules.


