references/obsidian/📑notes/🔢Tradesize rule notes.md, before:

Tags: #trade-classification #trade-size-rule

Motivated by the diminishing performance of the classical algorithms (such as the previously introduced tick test and quote rule) for option trades, where the trade size matches the bid or ask size, [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]] propose to 
Due to the restrictions on the trade size, this rule needs to be combined with other rules.

**Notes:**
- proposed on the ISE and CBOE dataset
- “We hypothesize that this overall weak performance is driven by sophisticated customers often using limit orders instead of market orders when implementing their trading strategy. Potential reasons are that bid-ask spreads are relatively high and option bid and ask quotes are updated infrequently (see Muravyev and Pearson (2020) for a related discussion on liquidity timing). When a customer’s limit order is filled by a market maker, the order is systematically misclassified by quote rules. We identify such limit orders by comparing trade sizes with bid and ask quote sizes and propose a correction to their classification.” (see [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]) For the idea of sophisticated customers in US law (see [[@fletcherSophisticatedInvestorsFederal1988]])
- trade size matches exactly either the bid or ask quote size, it is likely that the quote came from a customer, the market maker found it attractive and, therefore, decided to fill it completely. (see [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]) 
- “Market makers that completely fill such limit orders trigger the trade execution with a trade size equal to the quote size. In such a situation, the customer buys at the prevailing bid and sells at the prevailing ask, leading to misclassifications by the original quote rule.” (Grauer et al., 2022, p. 13)
- classify trades for which the trade size is equal to the quoted bid size as customer buys and those with a trade size equal to the ask size as customer sells. (see [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]])
- Result from two subsample analysis: “Two subsample analyses confirm this conjecture and show that the strongest improvements arise for small and medium-sized trades that occur at the bid or ask quote.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 4)
- Subsample 1: “We show the overall success rates of the classification algorithms using our trade size rule and also calculate the change in the success rates compared to the same algorithms not using the trade size rule in parentheses. The results show that our new rule works best for small to medium-sized trades and even leads to a slight deterioration of the performance for the largest trade sizes.” (Grauer et al., 2022, p. 15)
- Subsample 2: “As a second subsample analysis, we evaluate the performance of our trade size rule separately for different locations of trade prices relative to the bid and ask quotes at the ISE.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 15)
- Observation from subsample: “The results in Table 5 show that the new rule works best for trades occurring at the ask or bid quote and improves the success to classify at-quote trades by up to 21%. Contrary, the trade size rule even deteriorates the performance to correctly classify outside-quote trades compared to the traditional trade classification approaches by up to 4.5%. These results are also in line with our hypothesis that market makers fill limit orders from customers at the limit price, set by the customer. Contrary, if the trade price is outside the bid-ask spread, this is an indication that a customer wanted to trade against a standing limit order of a market maker, but the size of the market maker’s quote was not sufficient, leading to a further price deterioration.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]],, p. 15)
- Accuracy of 79.92 % on the 22.3 % of the trades that could classified, not all!. (see [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]])
- “We find that about 80% of all trades, for which either the bid or ask quote size corresponds to the trade size, are correctly classified using our newly proposed rule. Considering all trades in the matched ISE dataset, our trade size rule improves the performance of the classification algorithms by about 11%.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 4)
- “The out-of-sample tests on the CBOE dataset, which we perform as the second step in our research plan, confirm the superior performance of our two new trade classification rules. We find that about 85% of all trades, for which either the bid or ask quote size corresponds to the trade size, are correctly classified using our newly proposed trade size rule.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 4)
- Couple with other algorithms if trade sizes and quote sizes do not match / or if the trade size matches both the bid and ask size. For other 
- Requires other rules, similar to the quote rule, as only a small proportion can be matched.
- tested on option data / similar data set. Not frequently used in literature.

Commit message:

Add a chapter on depth rule🔢 (#147)
Adresses #10

references/obsidian/📑notes/🔢Tradesize rule notes.md, after:

Tags: #trade-classification #trade-size-rule

Motivated by the diminishing performance of the classical algorithms (such as the previously introduced tick test and quote rule) for option trades, where the trade size matches the bid or ask size, [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]] propose to 
Due to the restrictions on the trade size, this rule needs to be combined with other rules.

In a similar vein, the *trade size rule* reuses the ask and bid quote size to improve the classification performance of trades where the trade size equals the ask quote or bid quote sizes.

**Notes:**
- proposed on the ISE and CBOE dataset
- “We hypothesize that this overall weak performance is driven by sophisticated customers often using limit orders instead of market orders when implementing their trading strategy. Potential reasons are that bid-ask spreads are relatively high and option bid and ask quotes are updated infrequently (see Muravyev and Pearson (2020) for a related discussion on liquidity timing). When a customer’s limit order is filled by a market maker, the order is systematically misclassified by quote rules. We identify such limit orders by comparing trade sizes with bid and ask quote sizes and propose a correction to their classification.” (see [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]) For the idea of sophisticated customers in US law (see [[@fletcherSophisticatedInvestorsFederal1988]])
- trade size matches exactly either the bid or ask quote size, it is likely that the quote came from a customer, the market maker found it attractive and, therefore, decided to fill it completely. (see [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]) 
- “Market makers that completely fill such limit orders trigger the trade execution with a trade size equal to the quote size. In such a situation, the customer buys at the prevailing bid and sells at the prevailing ask, leading to misclassifications by the original quote rule.” (Grauer et al., 2022, p. 13)
- classify trades for which the trade size is equal to the quoted bid size as customer buys and those with a trade size equal to the ask size as customer sells. (see [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]])
- Result from two subsample analysis: “Two subsample analyses confirm this conjecture and show that the strongest improvements arise for small and medium-sized trades that occur at the bid or ask quote.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 4)
- Subsample 1: “We show the overall success rates of the classification algorithms using our trade size rule and also calculate the change in the success rates compared to the same algorithms not using the trade size rule in parentheses. The results show that our new rule works best for small to medium-sized trades and even leads to a slight deterioration of the performance for the largest trade sizes.” (Grauer et al., 2022, p. 15)
- Subsample 2: “As a second subsample analysis, we evaluate the performance of our trade size rule separately for different locations of trade prices relative to the bid and ask quotes at the ISE.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 15)
- Observation from subsample: “The results in Table 5 show that the new rule works best for trades occurring at the ask or bid quote and improves the success to classify at-quote trades by up to 21%. Contrary, the trade size rule even deteriorates the performance to correctly classify outside-quote trades compared to the traditional trade classification approaches by up to 4.5%. These results are also in line with our hypothesis that market makers fill limit orders from customers at the limit price, set by the customer. Contrary, if the trade price is outside the bid-ask spread, this is an indication that a customer wanted to trade against a standing limit order of a market maker, but the size of the market maker’s quote was not sufficient, leading to a further price deterioration.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]],, p. 15)
- Accuracy of 79.92 % on the 22.3 % of the trades that could classified, not all!. (see [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]])
- “We find that about 80% of all trades, for which either the bid or ask quote size corresponds to the trade size, are correctly classified using our newly proposed rule. Considering all trades in the matched ISE dataset, our trade size rule improves the performance of the classification algorithms by about 11%.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 4)
- “The out-of-sample tests on the CBOE dataset, which we perform as the second step in our research plan, confirm the superior performance of our two new trade classification rules. We find that about 85% of all trades, for which either the bid or ask quote size corresponds to the trade size, are correctly classified using our newly proposed trade size rule.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 4)
- trade size matches exactly either the bid or ask quote size, it is likely that the quote came from a customer, the market maker found it attractive and, therefore, decided to fill it completely. (see [[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]])
- Couple with other algorithms if trade sizes and quote sizes do not match / or if the trade size matches both the bid and ask size. For other 
- Requires other rules, similar to the quote rule, as only a small proportion can be matched.
- tested on option data / similar data set. Not frequently used in literature.
