
## Trade Initiator in CBOE / ISE dataset
relates to [[🌏Dataset]]


### How the trade initiator is obtained
- “Because evaluating the performance of trade classification algorithms requires information on the true side of the trade, we combine information from intraday transaction data and daily Open/Close data to arrive at such a benchmark. Our two Open/Close datasets are available on a daily level and cover trading volume at the ISE and the CBOE, respectively.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 8) https://datashop.cboe.com/documents/Option_Trades_Layout.pdf and https://datashop.cboe.com/documents/Option_Quotes_Layout.pdf
- “We take advantage of the fact that if there were only customer buy (sell) orders on a specific day for a given option series at one particular exchange, Open/Close data allows to classify all transactions in the LiveVol dataset on that day at the respective exchange as buy (sell) orders.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 8)
- https://www.cboe.com/us/equities/trading/offerings/order_types_and_routing/
- “We take advantage of the fact that if there were only customer buy (sell) orders on a specific day for a given option series at one particular exchange, Open/Close data allows to classify all transactions in the LiveVol dataset on that day at the respective exchange as buy (sell) orders.” (Grauer et al., 2022, p. 8) “Consistent with previous literature, we assume that the customer is the party with a demand for options.” (Grauer et al., 2022, p. 8) “Therefore, we use the customer buy/sell indicator obtained from Open/Close data as the benchmark to empirically validate the accuracy of trade classification methods applied to intraday option transactions from LiveVol.” (Grauer et al., 2022, p. 8)
- “For each record in the matched trade sample, one of five trader types is available: M, C, B, F, and N. The letter represents the account to which a trade is assigned. CBOE market makers are indicated by M, and public customer accounts are denoted by C. Broker-dealer accounts (as distinct from market maker accounts) are represented by B and are defined according to the SEC’s definition of a broker-dealer. These trades are done on their own behalf, not as agents (which would be listed as C trades). F and N indicate firm and non-member accounts. It is worth noting that CBOE members representing large financial conglomerates, such as Merrill Lynch or Fidelity, might trade as M, B, or F, depending on which account is to be assigned to the trade. The data do not provide information on the identity of each trader, only the type.” ([[@savickasInferringDirectionOption2003]], 2003, p. 884)

- The INET data indicate whether each trade executes against a sitting buy or sell order in the limit order book.8 Following the chronology of order submission logic proposed by OddersWhite (2000), we designate trades that execute against a sitting buy order (a buy limit order) as seller-initiated and trades that execute against a sitting sell order (a sell limit order) as buyerinitiated. This procedure produces a dataset of short sales and long sales executed on the INET platform with the true trade initiator identified directly from the order data. https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/145016916.pdf


Following a common track in literature, we 

## Views
- “In the literature, researchers use different definitions of trade initiators based presumably on data availability. Odders-White (2000) considers the last arriving order to be the trade initiator. She can make this determination because the TORQ database includes the NYSE audit file, which contains order-entry time for both sides of the trade. Papers such as Lee (1992) and Petersen and Fialkowski (1994) consider the active side to be market orders. Kraus and Stoll (1972) consider the active side to be the side with fewer parties. Finucane (2000) and Lee and Radhakrishna (2000) note many orders cannot be unambiguously defined as buyeror seller-initiated. Finucane (2000) finds that nearly one-fourth of all trades do not occur as the result of the arrival of a market order. In his final analysis, Finucane (2000) examines trades with at least one standard non-tick sensitive buy or sell market order in the trade. Ellis et al. (2000) and Theissen (2000) take the approach of inferring trade direction fromthe side contra to the dealer.” ([[@petersonEvaluationBiasesExecution2003]], p. 263)

“Because we do not have access to the NYSE audit file, we cannot define a trade initiator in the same way as those who have used TORQ data. Therefore, our approach will be to begin with all regular-way orders and exclude orders that are most likely not initiators. The following orders are excluded: (a.) limit orders that are not ‘marketable’, that is buy orders with limit price less than the ask or sell orders with limit price greater than the bid, (b.) tick sensitive orders because they usually do not initiate trades, (c.) stopped,3 or guaranteed orders, because these orders tend to be more like limit orders, and (d.) partial executions of marketable limit orders for more shares than are at the best quote and execute in multiple parts.” ([[@petersonEvaluationBiasesExecution2003]], p. 264)
- There are different views of what is considered as buyer / seller initiated i. e. [[@odders-whiteOccurrenceConsequencesInaccurate2000]] vs. [[@ellisAccuracyTradeClassification2000]]
(see [[@theissenTestAccuracyLee2000]] for more details)
- “The goal of the trade side classification is to determine the initiator of the transaction and to classify trades as being either buyer or seller motivated. However, a formal definition of a trade initiator is rarely stated in the literature. For example, the so-called “immediacy” definition describes initiators as traders who demand immediate execution (e.g. Lee and Radhakrishna, 2000). According to Odders-White (2000), the initiator of a transaction is the investor (buyer or seller) who placed his/her order last, chronologically (the so called “chronological” definition). These two definitions are equivalent in many cases. In both definitions, the initiator is the person who caused the transaction to occur.” ([[@olbrysEvaluatingTradeSide2018]]  p. 4)
- “Consistent with previous literature, we assume that the customer is the party with a demand for options. “Therefore, we use the customer buy/sell indicator obtained from Open/Close data as the benchmark to empirically validate the accuracy of trade classification methods applied to intraday option transactions from LiveVol.”  ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 8)
-  “A trade initiator as also understood as <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">the last party to agree to the trade or the party whose decision causes the trade to occu</mark>r (Lee and Radhakrishna 2000; Odders-White 2000; Chakrabarty et al. 2012).” ([[@nowakAccuracyTradeClassification2020]], p. 66)
- “The goal of trade classi"cation is to correctly determine the initiator of the transaction. Although the concept of a trade initiator is used throughout the "nance literature, a formal de"nition of the term is rarely stated. No examination of the accuracy of trade classi"cation algorithms can be conducted, however, without an explicit de"nition of the term &initiator'. One way to describe initiators is as traders who demand immediate execution (hereafter, the immediacy de"nition). A natural consequence of this de"nition is that traders placing market orders (or limit orders at the opposite quote) <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">are labeled the initiators, and traders placing limit orders are viewed as non-initiators or passive suppliers of liquidity. A variant of this de"nition is used by Lee and Radhakrishna (1996) in their evaluation of the Lee and Ready algorithm. </mark>Problems with this de"nition arise, however, when market orders cross, when limit orders are matched with other limit orders, and when market orders areOne way to describe initiators is as traders who demand immediate execution <mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">(hereafter, the immediacy de"nition).</mark> A natural consequence of this de"nition is that traders placing market orders (or limit orders at the opposite quote) are labeled the initiators, and traders placing limit orders are viewed as non-initiators or passive suppliers of liquidity” (Odders-White, 2000, p. 261) Problems with this de"nition arise, however, when market orders cross, when limit orders are matched with other limit orders, and when market orders Fig. 1. Sample transaction. stopped, all of which can occur frequently. In the TORQ data, crossed market orders represent almost 12% of the transactions involving market and/or limit orders on both the buy and the sell sides, and limit orders matched with limit orders constitute another 17%. In addition, Ready (1999) found that 29% of the market orders in the TORQ data are stopped. Lee and Radhakrishna circumvent this problem by focusing only on transactions that take place between a &clearly active' trader and a &clearly passive' trader, thereby eliminating most of these transactions from their study. Unfortunately, studies that utilize trade classi"cation algorithms apply the algorithms to all transactions, not to a select subset. Furthermore, if the data being used contain the order information necessary to distinguish between the active and the passive side, then trade classi"cation algorithms are unnecessary. Consequently, in this paper I use the following, more general, de"nition of initiator: De5nition. <mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">The initiator of a transaction is the investor (buyer or seller) who placed his or her order last, chronologically.</mark> The intuition behind the de"nition above (<mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">hereafter, the chronological de"nition</mark>) is very similar to that behind the immediacy de"nition. In both cases, the initiator is the person who caused the transaction to occur. In other words, by placing an order, the initiator determined the price and/or timing of the transaction. In fact, the two de"nitions are equivalent in many cases. For example, consider the transaction record in Fig. 1. The buy limit order was placed at 1:02:55 and was matched with the standing sell limit order that had been placed approximately 2 h earlier. Consequently, this transaction is classi"ed as buyer-initiated using the chronological de"nition above. The transaction in this example would also be classi"ed as buyerinitiated using the immediacy de"nition, since the buy limit order was placed at the prevailing ask quote.” (Odders-White, 2000, p. 262)
- In a high-frequency setting, trade classification is much more difficult. In the **futures markets** we investigate, there is **no specialist**, and liquidity arises from an electronic order book containing limit orders placed by a variety of traders. In this electronic market, a trader could hit the book at the same level as the last trade or could submit a limit order that improves the last traded price, and the tick rule can assign the wrong side to the trade.9 Additionally, order splitting is the norm, cancellations of quotes and orders are rampant, and the sheer volume of trades is overwhelming.10 Using E-mini S&P 500 futures data from May 2010, we found that an average day featured 2,650,391 bestbid-or-offer (BBO) quote changes due to order additions or cancellations, and 789,676 quote changes due to trades. Because the BBO changes several times between trades, many contracts exchanged at the same price in fact occurred against the bid and the offer. In this high-frequency world, applying standard algorithms over individual transactions is problematic. -> there seems to be a market trader for CBOE and specialist works at the floor and is a type of market maker.

### Immediacy View
- Submitters of market orders are called liquidity demanders, while submitters of limit orders stored stored in the book are liquidity providers.
- “A buyer-initiated trade (a buy) is a trade triggered by a buy market order matched against one or more sell limit orders in the order book. The opposite holds for a seller-initiated trade (a sell), where a sell market order is matched against one or more buy limit orders in the order book. Submitters of market orders are called liquidity demanders, while submitters of limit orders stored in the book are called liquidity providers. Trades for which a buyer and a seller are the same entity (crosses), as well as trades executed during single price auctions (exchange-initiated) represent a small fraction of all trades and are excluded from our analysis. The side of the market which submits a market order and thereby initiates a trade is called a trade initiator. The trade initiator is the same as the initiator of the market order which triggered the trade, which allows to use the former to determine the latter.1” ([[@blazejewskiLocalNonparametricModel2005]], 2005, p. 482)
- “When trade IDs are available, the chronological approach is used where the trade initiator is identified as being the trader who places an order last chronologically. The two-part rationale behind this approach is that: (i) the first-in party to the trade acts as the liquidity provider at its chosen price; and (ii) the last-in party pays the “immediacy premium” for the rapid execution of the trade. The advantage of this approach is that it considers both dimensions of liquidity for a wider set of order type pairings.” ([[@aktasTradeClassificationAccuracy2014]], p. 267)
- “Since the times and IDs of each order and trade are available for our propriety dataset from the BIST, we use the more accurate chronological approach as the benchmark for the true initiator of a trade.3 “3 When trader IDs are not available (Lee and Ready, 1991), the immediacy approach defines the trade initiator as the trader<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;"> who demands immediate execution (i.e., places a market order) and the non-initiator as the trader who is a liquidity provider but does not require immediate execution (i.e., places a limit order).” </mark>([[@aktasTradeClassificationAccuracy2014]], 2014, p. 261)

## Chronological View
- “When trade IDs are not available, a trade is assumed to be initiated by the trader whose market order has been executed against a standing limit order. The advantage of this immediacy approach is that it considers both dimensions of liquidity for trades that match a market with a limit order that are on opposite sides of the market. However, as noted by Odders-White (2000), this approach cannot identify the actual trade initiator for crossed market orders, limit–limit order matches and stopped market orders.” ([[@aktasTradeClassificationAccuracy2014]], p. 267)
- “2.3 True Trade Initiator In order to identify whether each trade in our sample is a buy or a sell, we follow the definition of initiator used in Odders-White (2000).13 She defines the trade initiator based on chronological order arrival, that is, the order that arrives second is the order that actually “initiates” the trade. For example if a market buy order comes in at 11:15AM and hits a limit sell order that had been standing in the book since 11:00AM, that trade would be classified as a buy for our purposes. To determine the true trade initiator in our sample, we first classify fully-executed orders into active and passive categories. An active order is executed at the same date and time as it is submitted to the marketplace, and is, essentially, a market order. In other words, the submission of an active order leads directly to a trade and the trade initiator will take the same buy or sell direction as that trig12 According to Euronext rules, from 07:15 until 09:00, orders accumulate in the order book, at 09:00 orders in the central book are matched and an opening price is set. Stocks are then to trade continuously starting at 09:01 so we are being conservative in deleting the first 15 minutes. This process occurs at the end of the day as well, with orders accumulating in the book starting at 17:25. <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">13 Ellis et al. (2000) note that the Odders-White (2000) method is preferred when a researcher has access to the order book, as we do.</mark> Current work on LR uses this classification scheme (see, for example, Chakrabarty et al. (2012))” gering active order. A passive order is a non-market order whose execution time is always later than its submission time. In this case, the initiator of a trade will be the opposite buy or sell direction of a matching passive order. Active orders account for 97.59% of true trade initiator matches across our sample.” ([[@panayidesComparingTradeFlow2014]], 2014, p. 11)

<mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">“Our proprietary data provide the bid quote, the ask quote, the transaction price, the trade volume, a trader identity code, and a buy/sell indicator.5 The buy/sell indicator specifies the direction of the reporting party. If the seller re? ported the trade, then the trade would be called a sale regardless of the price at which it occurred. Thus, this indicator tells us the buyer and the seller in the trans? action, but not the trade direction per se. We can determine whether the trade was a buy or a sale by using the trader identity code in conjunctioh with the buy/sell indicator. The trader identity code is a four-letter code for every NASD member.” (Ellis et al., 2000, p. 532)</mark>

<mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">“In the literature, researchers use different definitions of trade initiators based presumably on data availability. Odders-White (2000) considers the last arriving order to be the trade initiator. She can make this determination because the TORQ database includes the NYSE audit file, which contains order-entry time for both sides of the trade. Papers such as Lee (1992) and Petersen and Fialkowski (1994) consider the active side to be market orders. Kraus and Stoll (1972) consider the active side to be the side with fewer parties. Finucane (2000) and Lee and Radhakrishna (2000) note many orders cannot be unambiguously defined as buyeror seller-initiated. Finucane (2000) finds that nearly one-fourth of all trades do not occur as the result of the arrival of a market order. In his final analysis, Finucane (2000) examines trades with at least one standard non-tick sensitive buy or sell market order in the trade. Ellis et al. (2000) and Theissen (2000) take the approach of inferring trade direction fromthe side contra to the dealer.” (Peterson and Sirri, 2003, p. 263)</mark>

<mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">ur definition of buyer- and seller-initiated trades is based on the position taken by the Makler. It has the potential advantage of being directly related to many traditional microstructure models which assume the presence of a market maker. It has, on the other hand, the drawback that only transactions involving the Makler as a buyer or a seller can be classified.</mark>

“For the remaining 75.4% of the sample, knowing the identity of the trader and whether he was buying or selling allows us to determine directly whether the trade was buy- or sell-initiated. These are market maker-customer or brokercustomer trades (26.2%) and market maker-broker trades (49.2%). For example, suppose that a trade is recorded as a sell by the market maker and the other party is a customer. This trade only occurs because the customer wants to trade: the market maker is the liquidity provider, and we categorize such a trade as a buyinitiated trade.7” ([Ellis et al., 2000, p. 533](zotero://select/library/items/54BPHWMV))

% TODO: Write about different views on trade initiators in one sentence. Might be due to technical limitations. Ours is likely similar to Ellis or Theissen (p.3-4)-> also Savickas? (found in Peterson and Sirri)

% “Second, the present paper uses a different definition of the true trade classification than both Odders-White (1999) and Lightfoot et al. (1999). These authors consider a transaction to be buyer-initiated [seller-initiated] if the buy order [sell order] was placed last, chronologically. In contrast, we use a definition based on the position taken by the Makler (the equivalent of the specialist). If the Makler sold [bought] shares the transaction is classified as being buyer-initiated [seller-initiated]. This is similar to the approach in Ellis / Michaely / O’Hara (1999). They classify a trade as buyer-initiated [seller-initiated] if a customer or broker bought shares from [sold shares to] a marketmaker or if a customer bought shares from [sold shares to] a broker. Inter-broker and inter. 4 dealer trades are not classified. It is interesting to compare our results to those of Ellis / Michaely / O’Hara (1999) because the trading protocols in the two markets under scrutiny differ significantly. Whereas NASDAQ is a multiple dealer market, the Frankfurt Stock Exchange is a specialist market organized in a way similar to the NYSE.” ([Theissen, 2000, p. 4](zotero://select/library/items/ESEIBAMC)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/2XMIU8NA?page=5&annotation=J2WH29SQ))

  

% “We are not able to directly sign trades between two market makers (16.6% of the trades), or two brokers (4.5%). For 3.5% of the sample, we know that the trade took place on an ECN because one of the trader identities attached to the trade is the ECN identity code. We cannot sign the ECN trades as we do not have the time the orders were placed with the ECN. Because ECNs function as limit order books, we would need to know the time each order was placed and then use time priority to infer trade direction, with the later order being the trade motivator. (This is how Odders-White infers trade direction using the TORQ database.) Similarly, for the market maker-market maker and broker-broker trades, we do not know which party initiated the trade. In total, we exclude 24.6% of the sample that we cannot accurately sign.” ([Ellis et al., 2000, p. 533](zotero://select/library/items/54BPHWMV)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TTB4YUW6?page=6&annotation=XN5NQJMI))

  

%“For the remaining 75.4% of the sample, knowing the identity of the trader and whether he was buying or selling allows us to determine directly whether the trade was buy- or sell-initiated. These are market maker-customer or brokercustomer trades (26.2%) and market maker-broker trades (49.2%). For example, suppose that a trade is recorded as a sell by the market maker and the other party is a customer. This trade only occurs because the customer wants to trade: the market maker is the liquidity provider, and we categorize such a trade as a buyinitiated trade.7” ([Ellis et al., 2000, p. 533](zotero://select/library/items/54BPHWMV)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/TTB4YUW6?page=6&annotation=42WJF2N6))



Concept of market depth focuses on the volume which can be observed at the current price level [[49](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B49-entropy-23-00568)]. From investors’ and stock market analysts’ point o view, market depth is crucial because it can be treated as quantity dimension of market liquidity [[51](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B51-entropy-23-00568)]. Harris [[69](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B69-entropy-23-00568)] points out that the topic concerning dimensions of liquidity is especially interesting for practitioners as they often think about liquidity quite intuitively. Thinking about liquidity, investors usually think about trading quickly, trading large size, or trading at low costs.

According to the literature related to the microstructure of markets, several proxies of market depth are proposed: (1) depth as a number of units offered at the ask price plus a number of units at the bid price (e.g., [[46](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B46-entropy-23-00568),[51](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B51-entropy-23-00568),[52](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B52-entropy-23-00568)]), (2) dollar depth calculated in currency terms (e.g., [[70](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B70-entropy-23-00568)]), (3) an average depth of the ask and the bid (e.g., [[71](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B71-entropy-23-00568)]), (4) an average dollar depth measured in currency terms (e.g., [[71](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B71-entropy-23-00568)]), (5) various versions of order ratio as a proxy of realized market depth (e.g., [[43](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B43-entropy-23-00568),[49](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B49-entropy-23-00568),[51](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B51-entropy-23-00568),[52](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B52-entropy-23-00568),[53](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/#B53-entropy-23-00568)]). The vast majority of these depth proxies require information about ask and bid prices.

However, although the WSE is a pure order-driven market with an electronic order book, information about ask and bid prices is not publicly available. Therefore, the side initiating a transaction cannot be directly identified from a data set. This problem concerns many emerging markets in the world, and a procedure inferring the initiator of a trade is needed in such cases.

Taking the above into consideration, this research contributes to the existing literature regarding dimensions of market liquidity by introducing and utilizing a new methodology for estimation of market depth and liquidity with the EMD indicator based on the Shannon entropy and supported by an algorithm inferring the initiator of a trade.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8147648/


Propositions of new classification methods in response to the new reality of financial markets are rare. Easley et al.’s (2012) Bulk Volume Classification (BVC) algorithm is a more radical change in method that is not intended to find the trade direction of the liquidity demanding party. Chakrabarty et al. (2015) show that the BVC algorithm is inferior to the LR algorithm at that task, similarly to Panayides et al. (2014), whose results, however, depend on specific modeling choices. (https://dauphine.psl.eu/fileadmin/mediatheque/chaires/fintech/articles/1_UPDATE_Simon_Jurkatis_YFS2019.pdf)

Recently, Easley et al. (2012, 2016) proposed a new mechanism to classify financial markets transactions into the trading volume of informed and uninformed traders. Their method is motivated by two observations of modern financial markets: first, the classical classification algorithms, which derive the liquidity demanding party— traditionally assumed to be the informed one—for each trade, do not provide accurate results due to the effect of today’s fast markets on the data records, and second, the liquidity demander is not a uniformly valid indicator for the informed trader in the first place. Despite the second observation, the trade direction of the liquidity demanding side of the order flow remains a popular indicator of informed trading (see, e.g., Bernile et al., 2016; Chordia et al., 2017; Hu, 2014, 2017; Muravyev, 2016) the appropriateness of which is context specific but particularly sensible when informed traders demand immediacy for their transactions in order to gain most from their informational advantage. In these cases, studies rely on the classical classification algorithms, most prominently the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm, to obtain the indicator of the liquidity demanding side of the transaction, the trade initiator, as do traditional measures of market liquidity (Huang and Stoll, 1996; Fong et al., 2017). Notwithstanding the challenges posed by today’s fast markets, however, little attempts have been made to adjust or design new algorithms to obtain the trade initiator for more recent data. (https://dauphine.psl.eu/fileadmin/mediatheque/chaires/fintech/articles/1_UPDATE_Simon_Jurkatis_YFS2019.pdf)

The LR algorithm (Lee and Ready, 1991) is the most popular choice to classify trade data into the orders of the liquidity demanding and supplying sides. It compares the transaction price to the mid-point of the ask and bid quote at the time the trade took place. If the transaction price is greater (smaller) than the mid-point the liquidity demanding side is the buyer (seller), i.e. the trade is buyer-(seller-)initiated. If the transaction price is equal to the mid-point, the trade initiator is assigned according to the tick-test. That is, if the transaction price is greater (smaller) than the last price that is not equal to the current transaction price, the trade was buyer-(seller- )initiated. (https://dauphine.psl.eu/fileadmin/mediatheque/chaires/fintech/articles/1_UPDATE_Simon_Jurkatis_YFS2019.pdf)


For example, Finucane (2000) equates the trade initiator with the trade direction of the market order, including market-crosses for which a definition of the trade initiator is not straight forward, and finds an accuracy of 84%. Lee and Radhakrishna (2000), on the other hand, who follow a similar but more restrictive definition by excluding market-crosses, find an accuracy of 93%. Yet, only 50% of their sample qualifies for their definition. The possibility of market orders trading against each other, however, should not be of any concern given today’s fast execution times. Another identification of the trade initiator is provided by Ellis et al. (2000) and Theissen (2001) who find accuracies of 81% and 75%, respectively. Both study dealer markets and identify the trade initiator by the trade direction opposite to the dealer, because the dealer is supposed to cater to the demand of the customer. In markets where dealers play a larger role, however, there is more room for individual deviations from a standard procedure of matching orders, which are not captured by the algorithms, and dealers may not always trade passively to manage their inventory.

In this paper, I propose a new algorithm to classify transactions into the orders of liquidity demanders and suppliers and show that it outperforms the traditional alternatives, particularly under the challenging conditions of fast markets. The proposed algorithm also provides a remedy to the frequently reported deteriorating effect of time-delays between recorded trades and quotes on the classification accuracy when studying historical data. (https://dauphine.psl.eu/fileadmin/mediatheque/chaires/fintech/articles/1_UPDATE_Simon_Jurkatis_YFS2019.pdf)

In these cases, studies rely on the classical classification algorithms, most prominently the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm, to obtain the indicator of the liquidity demanding side of the transaction, the trade initiator, as do traditional measures of market liquidity (Huang and Stoll, 1996; Fong et al., 2017).

Examining the origin of each trade by tracing the trade to the original order introduces the concept of trade origination. **Some orders provide liquidity to the market while others take away liquidity**. This paper proposes using all the information surrounding the trade and order to determine the liquidity effect. By observing the liquidity motivation (LM) of each order, the price or time priority can be used with the order type and trades can then be classified based on their impact on liquidity immediate execution, increase liquidity and do not necessarily result in a trade, while orders that reduce the availability of shares for immediate execution demand liquidity and result in a trade. This procedure examines the inputs to the trading process to classify resulting trades, and thus the resulting classifications are source-based rather than inference-based. Even though orders are used in this paper as one of the sources of information, changes in liquidity can be observed around trades to identify the trade direction, however this method would introduce some inferences.

“One way to describe initiators is as traders who demand immediate execution (hereafter, the immediacy de"nition). A natural consequence of this de"nition is that traders placing market orders (or limit orders at the opposite quote) are labeled the initiators, and traders placing limit orders are viewed as non-initiators or passive suppliers of liquidity” (Odders-White, 2000, p. 261)

“Classification Methods and Previous Analyses Trade classification infers which trade participant initiated a trade by being the aggressor, consistent with Odders-White (2000) defining the laterarriving order as the trade initiator.” ([[@rosenthalModelingTradeDirection2012]], p. 3) -> adapts definition of Odders-and White

“Firm proprietary traders sometimes are end users of options and sometimes are liquidity suppliers. Consequently, we compute net end-user demand for an option in two different ways. First, we assume that firm proprietary traders are end users and compute the net demand for an option as the sum of the public customer and firm proprietary trader long open interest minus the sum of the public customer and firm proprietary trader short open interest. We refer to net demand computed in this way as non-market-maker net demand. Second, we assume that the firm proprietary traders are liquidity suppliers and compute the net demand for an option as the public customer long open interest minus the public customer short open interest. We refer to net demand computed in this second way as public customer net demand. The results are similar for non-market-maker net demand and public customer net demand” (Gârleanu et al., 2009, p. 16)