Tags: #trade-classification #quote-rule 

Traders taking the market maker’s bid (ask) were presumed to be sellers (buyers) (from [[@easleyFlowToxicityLiquidity2012]]) Interesting that they refer to the market maker.

**Notation:** For notation see [[@carrionTradeSigningFast2020]] or  [[@jurkatisInferringTradeDirections2022]] or [[@olbrysEvaluatingTradeSide2018]]..  Denoting the midpoint of the quoted spread by $m_{i, t}$, the predicted trade direction as per the quote rule is as follows:
$$
\begin{aligned}
& \text { If } p_{i, t}>m_{i, t} \text { Trade }_{i, t}=\text { Buy, } \\
& \text { If } p_{i, t}<m_{i, t}, \text { Trade }_{i, t}=\text { Sell. } \\
&
\end{aligned}
$$
- “Furthermore, price improvement will tend to lead to classification errors, since buys will occur away from the ask and sells will occur away from the bid. When trades receive price improvement, buys will also be more likely to occur on downticks and sells will be more likely to occur on upticks. I” (Finucane, 2000, p. 565)
- The quote rule classifies a trade as buyer initiated if the trade price is above the midpoint of the buy and ask as buys and if it is below as seller-initiated. Can not classify at the midpoint of the quoted spread. (see e.g., [[@leeInferringTradeDirection1991]] or [[@finucaneDirectTestMethods2000]])
- **Limitation:** 🧑‍🚒 by definition quote rule is unable to classify trades at the bids-ask spread midpoint.
- **Limitations:** 🧑‍🚒 “The LR, EMO, and CLNV algorithms require assigning one bid and ask quote to each trade in order to classify it. In an ideal data environment where at the time of the trade we record only one quote change, we know that the quotes in effect at the time of the trade are the last ones recorded before the time of the trade. With several quote changes occurring at the same time as the trade, however, the choice is less clear. For example, with one trade and three quote changes recorded at the same millisecond, the quotes corresponding to the trade could be the last quotes from before the millisecond or one of the first two recorded at the millisecond. The convention in such a case is to take the last ask and bid from before the time of the trade.” ([[@jurkatisInferringTradeDirections2022]], p. 7) -> see [[@holdenLiquidityMeasurementProblems2014]] “In particular, we consider three quote timing techniques: (1) Prior Second, (2) Same Second, and (3) Interpolated Time. Prior Second matches a trade in second s to the calculated NBBO quotes that are in-force in the prior second s−1. Same Second matches a trade in second s to the calculated NBBO quotes that are in-force during the same second s” ([Holden and Jacobsen, 2014, p. 1765](zotero://select/library/items/Q8JL6HEW)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZYFX3T4I?page=19&annotation=84CVY8BM)) In the JF-JFE-RFS survey described earlier, we find significant variation in the quote timing techniques used. Seven articles use Prior Second, three articles use Same Second, five articles use the quote five seconds earlier, and the rest provide no information on quote timing.” ([Holden and Jacobsen, 2014, p. 1765](zotero://select/library/items/Q8JL6HEW)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/ZYFX3T4I?page=19&annotation=FXDFXVMQ))
- **Attribution:** “The quote rule compares trade prices to the prevailing quote at the time of the trade. Trades at or above the ask are classified as buys; trades at or below the bid are classified as sells. Trades inside the spread are classified based on their proximity to the bid and ask ([[@harrisDayEndTransactionPrice1989]], 1989). Trades at the midpoint of the spread cannot be classified by using the quote rule.” ([Pöppe et al., 2016, p. 166](zotero://select/library/items/5A83SDDB)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/4XIK47X6?page=2&annotation=U4U9PWDS))
- See [[@hasbrouckTradesQuotesInventories1988]]. Might be one of the first to mention the quote rule. It is however not very clearly defined. Paper also discusses some (hand-wavy) approaches to treat midpoint transactions.
- “In other words, given a midpoint trade on a down (up) tick the next price change would likely be an up (down) tick” (Lee and Ready, 1991, p. 9)
- **Results:** 💸“The degree of success varies inversely with a rule’s reliance on past transaction prices: 82.78% for the quote rule, 80.11% for LR, 76.54% for EMO, and 59.4% for the tick method.” ([[@savickasInferringDirectionOption2003]], 2003, p. 886)
- **Results:** 💸 “We find that the quote rule performs best when applied successively to National Best Bid and Offer (NBBO) and ISE quotes as proposed by Muravyev and Ni (2020). Generally, quote rules outperform tick rules by far.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 3)
- **Results:** 💸 “An additional finding from this data set is that for trades with price improvements occurring inside the NBBO spread, the quote rule works better when applied first to quotes at the trading venue and then to the NBBO.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]], p. 3)
- **Results:** 💸 “Similarly, Savickas and Wilson (2003) show that all common methods perform poorly at estimating effective spreads for options. While the quote rule overestimates the spread due to its inability to account for reversed-quote trades, the tick rule severely underestimates effective spreads due to its low classification success.” ([[@savickasInferringDirectionOption2003]] p. 6)
