Tags: #trade-classification 

**Notes:**
- proposed on the CBOE and ISE dataset
- Alternative to handle midspread trades, that can not be classified using the quote rule.
- In the spirit of stacked ensembles the depth rule needs to be combined with other methods
**motivation:**
- “We hypothesize that a larger bid or ask quoted size, i.e., a higher depth at the best bid or ask, indicates a higher liquidity similar to a tighter bid or ask quote” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]), p. 14)
- “As a consequence, we classify midspread trades as buyer-initiated, if the ask size exceeds the bid size, and as seller-initiated, if the bid size is higher than the ask size. If the ask size matches the bid size, midspread trades still cannot be classified by this approach” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]), p. 14)
- Seems like there is a broader concept. Found in Hagströmer: “I propose two alternative effective spread estimators that overcome the problem of discrete prices. For these, I rely on continuous fundamental value proxies that factor in the relative quantities posted at the best bid and ask prices, which I refer to as the “order book imbalance. The motivation is that the depth at a given price depends on a tradeoff between the liquidity suppliers’ revenue at execution (the expected effective spread) and the costs of trading with informed traders (as in Glosten, 1994). If the bidside spread is tight, market makers infer that the potential revenue is low and then quote relatively low bid-price quantities. Empirical evidence of such quoting schemes are provided by Kavajecz (1999) and Sandås (2001).” ([[@hagstromerBiasEffectiveBidask2021]], p. 315)
- “Why the order book imbalance is potentially useful to track the fundamental value is best understood from a liquidity-supplier perspective. Although the bias considered here is driven in large part by the price sensitivity of liquidity demanders, the depths at the best quotes are determined by the distance to the fundamental value. In the model by Glosten (1994), the optimal depth in the limit order book is based on a tradeoff between the revenues expected from earning the effective spread, and the costs of trading with informed market orders. In a setting where liquidity demanders are potentially informed, and where the market order size depends on their marginal valuation and the terms of trade offered in the limit order book, Glosten (1994, Proposition 2) shows that the depth posted at a given price level, in equilibrium, is increasing in the distance to the fundamental value.4 That is, if the bid depth is lower than the ask depth, it indicates that the fundamental value is closer to the bid than to the ask price.” (Hagströmer, 2021, p. 318)

**limitation:** 👩‍🚒 only a proxy for tick rule. Must be combined with other rules.

**results:** 💸
- Improves LR algorithm by 0.8 %. Overall accuracy 75 %. ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]), p. 4)
- “Applying our depth rule after using the trade size rule and the quote rule and classifying the very small number of midspread trades that cannot be signed by our depth rule using the reverse tick test yields an additional improvement of 1.2% on average. It improves the success rate of the quote rule applied to CBOE quotes first and then to the NBBO to 73.37 %. These results confirm that our depth rule outperforms the standard and reverse tick test in classifying midspread trades.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]), p. 18)
- “Most importantly, in contrast to standard and reverse tick tests, our newly proposed depth rule leads to a significant improvement compared to using the quote rule alone, pointing to its superior performance to sign midspread trades that quote rules cannot classify.” ([[@grauerOptionTradeClassification2022]]), p. 21)