references/obsidian/📑notes/🤖FTTransformer notes.md, before:


Exemplary, the encoding of the option type could be  $\text{P}\mapsto 1$; $\text{C}\mapsto 2$, which would result in a selection of the second column of the embedding matrix whenever a put is traded. 


bias should be a vector as per tehir NIPS talk, shifting is needed for good performance https://slideslive.com/38968794/revisiting-deep-learning-models-for-tabular-data?ref=recommended)

Exemplary, the encoding of the option type could be  $\text{P}\mapsto 1$; $\text{C}\mapsto 2$, which would result in a selection of the second column of the embedding matrix whenever a put is traded. 

$$
\tag{1}
e_j= 
\begin{cases}
    W_j x_j +b_j, & \text{if } x_j \text{ is numeric}\\
    W_j[:c_j] +b_j,              & x_j \text{ is categorical}.
\end{cases}

$$

$e_j = W_j x_j +b_j$ (if $x_j$ is numerical with $W_j \in \mathbb{R}^{e_d}$ (element-wise multiplication))
$e_j = W_j[:c_j] +b_j$ (if $x_j$ is numerical with $W_j \in \mathbb{R}^d$ ( $W_j \in \mathbb{R}^{e_d \times c_j}$ look up table. 

The size is dependent on the embedding dim and the cardinality of the categorical feature.  multiplication with one-hot-encoded vector; or just access the columns as done in chapter [[🛌Token Embedding]] ); $S_j$ is not introduced in paper.


encoder of  [[@vaswaniAttentionAllYou2017]] () and BERT ([[@devlinBERTPretrainingDeep2019]])


also found in (... see citations in [[@gorishniyEmbeddingsNumericalFeatures2022]], e.g., [[@somepalliSAINTImprovedNeural2021]], [[@guoEmbeddingLearningFramework2021]] etc.) (poor paper by https://openreview.net/attachment?id=SJlyta4YPS&name=original_pdf), (see also [[@wangTransTabLearningTransferable]]. 
“propose to include column names into the tabular modeling. As a result, TransTab treats any tabular data as the composition of three elements: text (for categorical & textual cells and column names), continuous values (for numerical cells), and boolean values (for binary cells) .” ([Wang and Sun, p. 4](zotero://select/library/items/38EXIFQ9)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/C9P6BQ9N?page=4&annotation=2L6GMYKW)))

They learn embeddings for continuous, categorical and binary data and include the column headings) a recent work of a

Commit message:

Add chapter on FT-Transformer🕹️ (#181)
Adresses #10

references/obsidian/📑notes/🤖FTTransformer notes.md, after:


## Visualization

![[mashup-tokenizer-fttransformer.png]]
(by [[@devlinBERTPretrainingDeep2019]] (p. 4185) and [[@gorishniyRevisitingDeepLearning2021]] (p. 4)) ^23bb5c

## Position of CLS-Token

In the official implementation of [[@gorishniyRevisitingDeepLearning2021]], the $\texttt{[CLS]}$ token is appended to the tensor at the end. Recall from the chapter [🅰️Attention]] that order is preserved. Also, the tensor is expanded, thus final column is repeated to provide an initial embedding for the $\texttt{[CLS]}$ token. For the explanation in this work, we stick to the formulation in the paper. 

In contrast to the TabTransformer, where all contextualized embeddings contribute to the prediction, the output probabilities are only derived from the final hidden state of a single, specialized token, the $\texttt{[CLS]}$ token.

## Other

Exemplary, the encoding of the option type could be  $\text{P}\mapsto 1$; $\text{C}\mapsto 2$, which would result in a selection of the second column of the embedding matrix whenever a put is traded. 


bias should be a vector as per tehir NIPS talk, shifting is needed for good performance https://slideslive.com/38968794/revisiting-deep-learning-models-for-tabular-data?ref=recommended)

Exemplary, the encoding of the option type could be  $\text{P}\mapsto 1$; $\text{C}\mapsto 2$, which would result in a selection of the second column of the embedding matrix whenever a put is traded. 

$$
\tag{1}
e_j= 
\begin{cases}
    W_j x_j +b_j, & \text{if } x_j \text{ is numeric}\\
    W_j[:c_j] +b_j,              & x_j \text{ is categorical}.
\end{cases}

$$

$e_j = W_j x_j +b_j$ (if $x_j$ is numerical with $W_j \in \mathbb{R}^{e_d}$ (element-wise multiplication))
$e_j = W_j[:c_j] +b_j$ (if $x_j$ is numerical with $W_j \in \mathbb{R}^d$ ( $W_j \in \mathbb{R}^{e_d \times c_j}$ look up table. 

The size is dependent on the embedding dim and the cardinality of the categorical feature.  multiplication with one-hot-encoded vector; or just access the columns as done in chapter [[🛌Token Embedding]] ); $S_j$ is not introduced in paper.


encoder of  [[@vaswaniAttentionAllYou2017]] () and BERT ([[@devlinBERTPretrainingDeep2019]])


also found in (... see citations in [[@gorishniyEmbeddingsNumericalFeatures2022]], e.g., [[@somepalliSAINTImprovedNeural2021]], [[@guoEmbeddingLearningFramework2021]] etc.) (poor paper by https://openreview.net/attachment?id=SJlyta4YPS&name=original_pdf), (see also [[@wangTransTabLearningTransferable]]. 
“propose to include column names into the tabular modeling. As a result, TransTab treats any tabular data as the composition of three elements: text (for categorical & textual cells and column names), continuous values (for numerical cells), and boolean values (for binary cells) .” ([Wang and Sun, p. 4](zotero://select/library/items/38EXIFQ9)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/C9P6BQ9N?page=4&annotation=2L6GMYKW)))

They learn embeddings for continuous, categorical and binary data and include the column headings) a recent work of a
