
- moneyness / time-to-maturity / how do both relate with trade classification / motives
- low accuracy for index options
	- Study sources of missclassification. See e. g., [[@savickasInferringDirectionOption2003]]
	- The extent to which inaccurate trade classification biases empirical research dependes on whether misclassifications occur randomly or systematically [[@theissenTestAccuracyLee2000]]. This document also contains ideas how to study the impact of wrong classifications in stock markets. Might different in option markets.
	- “Spreads are portfolios of options of the same type (either only calls or only puts). Combinations are portfolios of options of different types. Traders can form these complex trades by individually buying the component options or by trading standard packages. The advantage of the latter approach is that the trader is subject to only one bid-ask spread, while buying the component options individually results in paying the bid-ask spread for each option. The market maker determines how to allocate the bid-ask spread among all options in a complex trade. Thus, not all (if any) of the component options necessarily trade at their quotes. Therefore, complex trades are highly likely to produce RQ and outside-quote trades. Furthermore, labeling complex trades as buys or  sells is not straightforward. For example, a bull spread involves buying a call option and selling another call option with a higher strike price. Thus, a buy requires a sell, and it is not clear whether treating the two trades separately is appropriate. Index option trading involves many complex trades because taking covered positions in index options is not as easy (or possible) as in equity options. Frequently, the only alternatives to naked positions in index options are complex options. Therefore, one way to reduce the problem of complex trades is to exclude all index trades. As Table 1 indicates, this results in a significant increase in the classification precision of all methods, but loses roughly one quarter of the sample, which is unacceptable.” (Savickas and Wilson, 2003, p. 899) (Savickas and Wilson, 2003, p. 898)
	- Neither of the models can detect complex trades. It would require attention across rows and columns, which we outruled.
	- “In contrast to Pan and Poteshman (2006), we use a unique data set from the International Securities Exchange (ISE), which contains the complete daily record of buy and sell activity in index options over a 12-year period, together with details on whether a transaction is involved in opening or closing an options position. These options are actively traded; indeed, on the ISE, the notional volume in index options is about onefifth of the total notional volume in all individual stock options during our sample period.” (Chordia et al., 2021, p. 1)

“Savickas and Wilson 899 sells is not straightforward. For example, a bull spread involves buying a call option and selling another call option with a higher strike price. Thus, a buy requires a sell, and it is not clear whether treating the two trades separately is appropriate. Index option trading involves many complex trades because taking covered positions in index options is not as easy (or possible) as in equity options. Frequently, the only alternatives to naked positions in index options are complex options. Therefore, one way to reduce the problem of complex trades is to exclude all index trades. As Table 1 indicates, this results in a significant increase in the classification precision of all methods, but loses roughly one quarter of the sample, which is unacceptable.” (Savickas and Wilson, 2003, p. 899)
- low accuracy for trades outside the quotes
	- see also [[@ellisAccuracyTradeClassification2000]] for trades inside and outside the spread
	- “On the one hand, we would expect that the greater (smaller) the transaction price relative to the midspread, the more likely that the transaction is a buy (sell) and occurs on an uptick (a downtick), implying higher classification success for outside-quote trades, especially for large trades in which the trade initiator is willing to pay a premium for the execution of his large order.” ([[@savickasInferringDirectionOption2003]] p. 888)
	- “On the other hand, however, the outside-quote trades may be the manifestation of stale quotes, which result in misclassification. Also, the effect of market makers’ hedging and rebalancing trades on the classification of outside-quote trades is unclear. Section IV.C contains a logit analysis of outside-quote trades.” ([[@savickasInferringDirectionOption2003]], p. 888)
- high gains for options for otm options and options with long maturity
	- Accuracy is not the sole criterion. Depends on whether error is systematic or not. Thus, we do application study. See reasoning in ([[@theissenTestAccuracyLee2000]])
	- “Specifically, one of the most noticeable regularities is that smaller trades are classified more precisely. This is because these trades are more likely to be executed at quotes and are less prone to reversed-quote trading (partially due to the fact that many small trades are executed on RAES)” (Savickas and Wilson, 2003, p. 889)
	- Moneyness levels are “Out-of-the-money options offer the highest leverage (exposure for a dollar invested) and thus are particularly attractive for informed investors. Consistent with this argument, the information price impact is decreasing and convex in absolute delta. Figure 3(D) shows that the impact decreases from 0.4% for out-of-the-money options to 0.15% for in-the-money options. Next, private information is often short-lived and is related to near-term events, and thus short-term options are better suited for informed investors in addition to providing higher leverage. Indeed, the price impact decreases by 0.12% if time-to-expiration decreases from 80 days to 20 days. Buyer-initiated trades have a higher price impact than sell trades, because these trades provide an opportunity to bet not only on future volatility but also on the underlying direction. These results are broadly consistent with Pan and Poteshman (2006), except that I do not find a significant difference between call and put options, perhaps because my sample consists of large stocks that are easy to sell short.” (Muravyev, 2016, p. 695)
“Since time to maturity is inversely related to trade size, we observe greater classification errors for shorter maturity options.” (Savickas and Wilson, 2003, p. 889)
- performance gap in classical rules
- strong performance of neural networks / tree-based ensembles
	- We identify missingess in data to be down-ward biasing the results of classical estimators. ML predictors are robust to this missingness, as they can handle missing values and potentially substitute.
- methodology
	- our study puts special emphasises on thoughtful tuning, data pre-processing.
- the elephant in the room: 
	- labelled data and cmputational data. 
	- Finetune. Low cost of inference
- which algorithm is no preferable? Do Friedman rank test

## time-to-maturity
- “Expiration dummies are particularly good instruments. Investors substitute expiring option positions with similar nonexpiring ones in the three-day window around the expiration day (every third Friday of a month). Because investors are short call and put equity options on average, the rollover creates unprecedentedly large selling pressure in the nonexpiring options. Option expirations create exogenous variation in order imbalance, and thus exogenous variation in market-maker inventories as investors open new positions to replace positions in expiring options. Volatility and returns of the underlying stocks change little around expiration. Thus, fundamentals and informed trading are not responsible for the order imbalance.” (Muravyev, 2016, p. 700)
- “Order imbalance is extremely negative around option expiration because investors are rolling over their positions to nonexpiring options. The selling pressure is particularly large on the postexpiration Monday when the abnormal order imbalance reaches −24%.” (Muravyev, 2016, p. 701)

## Quotes change after the trade
“With respect to the intraday analysis, the interaction between trades and quotes is key to understanding how and why prices change. The literature identifies two reasons why quoted prices increase after a buyer-initiated trade. First, market-makers adjust upward their beliefs about fair value as the trade may contain private information (e.g., Glosten and Milgrom (1985)). Second, market-makers require compensation for allowing their inventory position to deviate from the desired level, and thus a risk-averse market-maker will accommodate a subsequent buy order only at a higher price (e.g., Stoll (1978)).” (Muravyev, 2016, p. 674)

## Quotes NBBO / Exchange
- “Condition (d) also serves another purpose. Since the trade price is equal to the NBBO price quoted by at least two exchanges, this condition resolves ambiguity about trade direction as further discussed in the Internet Appendix.” (Muravyev, 2016, p. 689)

## Algorithm
2.3.7 How to Write the Discussion  Assessment of the results  Comparison of your own results with the results of other studies = Citation of already published literature!  Components  Principles, relationships, generalizations shown by the results = Discussion, not recapitulation of the results  Exceptions, lack of correlation, open points  Referring to published work: = Results and interpretations in agreement with or in contrast to your results  Our Recommendations: The writing of the chapter “Discussion” is the most difficult one. Compare your own data/results with the results from other already published papers (and cite them!). Outline the discussion part in a similar way to that in the Results section = consistency. Evaluate whether your results are in agreement with or in contrast to existing knowledge to date. You can describe why or where the differences occur, e.g. in methods, in sites, in special conditions, etc. Sometimes it is difficult to discuss results without repetition from the chapter “Results”. Then, there is the possibility to combine the “Results” and “Discussion” sections into one chapter. However, in your presentation you have to classify clearly which are your own results and which are taken from other studies. For beginners, it is often easier to separate these sections.


## Other
- calculate $z$-scores / $z$-statistic of classification accuracies to assess if the results are significant. (see e. g., [[@theissenTestAccuracyLee2000]])
- provide $p$-values. Compare twitter / linkedin posting of S. Raschka on deep learning paper.
- When ranking algorithms think about using the onesided Wilcoxon signed-rank test and the Friedman test. (see e. g. , code or practical application in [[@perez-lebelBenchmarkingMissingvaluesApproaches2022]])
- To test these hypotheses it would be best if we had the precise motivation behind the trades. While such analysis is not feasible here, using trade classification algorithms, we are able to assign stock and option volume as buyer or seller initiated. Easley et al. (1998) show how this directional volume is more informative than raw volume, because signed volume provides important information about the motivation of the trade (bullish or bearish). ([[@caoInformationalContentOption2005]])
- [https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3398](https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3398)
- https://pdf.sciencedirectassets.com/271671/1-s2.0-S0304405X20X00067/1-s2.0-S0304405X19302831/am.pdf?X-Amz-Security-Token=IQoJb3JpZ2luX2VjEJT%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2FwEaCXVzLWVhc3QtMSJHMEUCIDixxfTiKliJIuzoOXxlII71RLwniTDskEPKeGqAyItEAiEA4%2Fytxevo9ZXJNkxW1jrTnKzaaobWySQgbq68siGmgwQquwUI7f%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2FARAFGgwwNTkwMDM1NDY4NjUiDLKVDK%2Bh4Dg%2B7qRvKCqPBUP%2BVpVVJhJWgxEXvneeMcgDHwz3Q%2BFj4BacIV3D2cLphWRHZirMPOW1Scz6VIzOfzGnUYgdZXRNb0yT8KQur9GvN%2B1TwgULtgOLUlII49PNpfnhgo%2B5TFji2%2BRpB4Bs7BoBu6JZH6x2vrhjfqFGSsl19%2Bsyxe3zfS%2BYZzLkEUBwXTVS0Omt3AWowOaltN5qRbzjH0M16ijT3HTA3BTtQJLZe%2BNqqKsohziXZJ2GIC0I%2BswnrB9qpx8TplWGO62ITP0I4Xa4F2GhzByCl2nrGKeHUdJ03VUa3dYpyw4ml8n3E7ADheEZh4yhh8W3GS%2Btc2AkrpJkl9JpInWeTwijmC5rsQVtRZfYLCNFXdSZkPtWFWOBYM0WVIiRHMx8urSTYs%2FQ5XiP61nmWn%2BlIdyeLDYgg8uYcBCwciMCBdfBKu86mAK42snqIIJC8fHQ6RjZ0HkTxXK3ecfWG9ZD5LYrwOig7B30VufNzSvG%2FnJ8UxeUOPfXcX9Ob8OEUuaWzvTCSU3%2BIsw8vx4%2BpScmof5EwYvWDb4ndAD02RdDsAps9DjoZT0Fo6ezxpGZYsSzJ%2FRvzXoxrKIhTVugO2%2BDJubQ9sHIex7HBmGf1dM3j56ypwqghzdFmDohh4bPT3oYbBkQkIeojKcuifG6RPtAROKxHdSv0Htm9LZrdehnkehKyeFESJ8pcZ9IrTP5sejH9%2BHrVo8m7gjUaYTw6vWdsQxw1dCZ96jSuoANt2O8QvxR5S%2BG078zV0yhx76Y1nuhz3Dzgk%2FJCwLUwklQcsGDNZzXKhuXoZkpyE1sHDgqeSwDU7xYdJEZnQy60exHcdnjh5qQt1cY3ZCb4EMH8Y4yUtDwJgf5YOlxHJo8rElAkn5T3e0w2YDWpAY6sQGhOGrkIFN%2FaJBDi7pCA1DemSn4hZ5FnHX1%2Fh492NDWmIx5ojFpVIHW5WftmRayIG6R4hzuIank8S0YgtSwnLUQpKMXKQEBeTmLwzHqVg7sHjO8dIJ0dtTywPmoP%2Fz7Op4wRbImbrCavUEUdf9bIt8ywHhHPJowJ9OnPNLByKti3DmdKLe%2FjO1iMpJGKTCwRu4WN9EDOsW3Jxo1xPUe3l2EUBbOB5oy6z3j8m1qo4bMbDE%3D&X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Date=20230623T124336Z&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&X-Amz-Expires=300&X-Amz-Credential=ASIAQ3PHCVTYUUDJI6EP%2F20230623%2Fus-east-1%2Fs3%2Faws4_request&X-Amz-Signature=f0e2119f981b01f0c6f371ba9815e791e0ff23c077563ba5b6e75152e2e77385&hash=97254ce55dfdd1c8959a1ac605bad32a3be5f6fff1c70209a668432c2a4bbeff&host=68042c943591013ac2b2430a89b270f6af2c76d8dfd086a07176afe7c76c2c61&pii=S0304405X19302831&tid=pdf-81ea8b48-352c-43fe-bfe6-12fecbdb988f&sid=d1961e3d9967514b7918a74-b56e3090c4eagxrqb&type=client
- https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3529
- https://www.dropbox.com/s/1i4zxc23qm00bv9/OptionMarketMakers.032623.pdf?dl=0
- https://dmurav.com/CV_Dmitry_Muravyev_202305.pdf
- for index options see [[@chordiaIndexOptionTrading2021]]
- To test these hypotheses it would be best if we had the precise motivation behind the trades. While such analysis is not feasible here, using trade classification algorithms, we are able to assign stock and option volume as buyer or seller initiated. Easley et al. (1998) show how this directional volume is more informative than raw volume, because signed volume provides important information about the motivation of the trade (bullish or bearish). ([[@caoInformationalContentOption2005]])