references/obsidian/📖chapters/🍔Layer Norm.md, before:

 [[@vaswaniAttentionAllYou2017]] (p. 3) extensively draw on *layer normalization* after the multi-headed attention and feed-forward sub-layers. Layer normalization is used for normalizing the activations of the sub-layer and to stabilize and accelerate the training of the network ([[@baLayerNormalization2016]])(p. 2). For the transformer, the normalization statistics are calculated separately for every instance, which guarantees scalability across different batch sizes. For a vector $\boldsymbol{e}\in \mathbb{R}^{d_e}$ the normalized output is given by: 
$$
\tag{4}
\widehat{\boldsymbol{e}}=\frac{e-m}{\sqrt{v}} \odot \boldsymbol{\gamma}+\boldsymbol{\beta},
$$
calculated with the statistics $\boldsymbol{m} = \sum_{i=1}^{d_{\mathrm{e}}} e[i] / d_{\mathrm{e}}$ and $v = \sum_{i=1}^{d_{\mathrm{e}}}(e[i]-\boldsymbol{m})^2 / d_{\mathrm{e}}$. Typically, the scale $\gamma$ and bias $\beta$ are set for a zero mean and unit variance.

![Layer-normalization](layer-norm-first-last.png) 
(Similar to [[@xiongLayerNormalizationTransformer2020]]; picture from https://github.com/dvgodoy/PyTorchStepByStep/blob/master/Chapter10.ipynb <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">somehow draw in final norm layer.</mark>)
^62bc77

![[layer-norm.png]]

[[@vaswaniAttentionAllYou2017]] (p. 3) employ *layer normalization* around each sub-layer after adding residual connections ([[🔗Residual connections]]). Derived from the order of the layers, this specific arrangement is called *post-layer normalization*. In contrast to post-layer normalization, for pre-normalization, the normalization is applied before the self-attention and feed-forward sub-layers and inside the residual connections. *Pre-norm* requires one additional normalization layer to pass only well-conditioned outputs from the transformer block to the successive layers [[@xiongLayerNormalizationTransformer2020]] (p. 5). Both architectures are depicted in Figure ([[#^62bc77]]). Many recent transformers feature a pre-normalization setup, as observed by [[@narangTransformerModificationsTransfer2021]]. Parts of its success, lie in faster training, omitting the need for costly learning rate warm-up stages, whereby the learning rate is initially decreased to keep the gradients balanced ([[@xiongLayerNormalizationTransformer2020]] (p. 2); [[@liuVarianceAdaptiveLearning2021]]; [[@liuUnderstandingDifficultyTraining2020]]). 

Also, *post-norm* transformers are particularly brittle to train with several documented convergence failures with its root cause in vanishing gradients, exploding gradients, and a higher dependency on the residual stream ([[@liuUnderstandingDifficultyTraining2020]] (p. 8), [[@shazeerAdafactorAdaptiveLearning2018]],  [[@wangLearningDeepTransformer2019]]). Their pre-norm counterpart increases the robustness in training, sometimes at the cost performance, as documented in [[@liuUnderstandingDifficultyTraining2020]].  We come back to this observation in Chapter [[💡Training of models (supervised)]].

Commit message:

Rewrite layer norm chapter and fuse with residual connections 🍔 (#169)
Adresses #10.

references/obsidian/📖chapters/🍔Layer Norm.md, after:

 ([[@vaswaniAttentionAllYou2017]]3) extensively draw on *layer normalization* after the multi-headed attention and feed-forward sub-layers. Layer normalization is used for normalizing the activations of the sub-layer and to stabilize and accelerate the training of the network ([[@baLayerNormalization2016]]2). For the transformer, the normalization statistics are calculated separately for every instance, which guarantees scalability across different batch sizes. For a vector $\boldsymbol{e}\in \mathbb{R}^{d_e}$ the normalized output is given by: 
$$
\tag{4}
\widehat{\boldsymbol{e}}=\frac{e-m}{\sqrt{v}} \odot \boldsymbol{\gamma}+\boldsymbol{\beta},
$$
calculated with the statistics $m = \sum_{i=1}^{d_{e}} \boldsymbol{e}[i] / d_{e}$ and $v = \sum_{i=1}^{d_{e}}(\boldsymbol{e}[i]-m)^2 / d_{e}$. Typically, the scale $\gamma$ and bias $\beta$ are set to preserve a zero mean and unit variance.

![[layer-norm.png]]
(Own work inspired by [[@wangLearningDeepTransformer2019]])

Until now it remains unclear, how the layer normalization intertwines with the sub-layers and the residual connections. Transformers are distinguished by the order in which layer normalization is added into the pre-norm and post-norm Transformer. Post-norm Transformers add layer normalization to the sub-layer *after* adding the input from the residual connections. The arrangement is depicted in (Cref). In contrast for the pre-norm Transformer, the normalization is applied *before* the self-attention and feed-forward sub-layers and inside the residual connections. Pre-norm requires one additional normalization layer to pass only well-conditioned outputs from the Transformer block to the successive layers ([[@xiongLayerNormalizationTransformer2020]]5). The setup is depicted in (Cref).

([[@vaswaniAttentionAllYou2017]]3) employ post-layer normalization, but recently, recent research has shown a shift towards pre-norm setups. ([[@narangTransformerModificationsTransfer2021]]4). Parts of this wide-spread adaption lie in faster training and omitting of the need for costly learning rate warm-up stages, whereby the learning rate is initially decreased to keep the gradients balanced ([[@xiongLayerNormalizationTransformer2020]]2) and ([[@liuUnderstandingDifficultyTraining2020]]8). Also, post-norm Transformers have been found brittle to train and prone to convergence failures with its root cause in vanishing gradients, exploding gradients, and an overall higher dependency on the residual stream ([[@liuUnderstandingDifficultyTraining2020]]8) and  [[@wangLearningDeepTransformer2019]]1812). Pre-norm Transformers, although they may sacrifice some performance, introduce a certain robustness to the training process. We come back to this observation in Cref ([[🤖TabTransformer]]) and [[💡Training of models (supervised)]].
