Previous studies on trade classification with machine learning made arbitrary selections of methods, failing to account for the latest advancements in the field (cp. cref-[[👪Related Work]]).  In this thesis, we perform a succinct discussion to select a set of supervised classifiers based on empirical evidence. To guide our discussion, we establish the following requirements a classifier must simulatenously meet:
-  *performance:* The approach must deliver state-of-the-art performance in tabular classification tasks. Trades are typically provided as tabular datasets, consisting of rows representing instances and columns representing features. The classifier must be suited for probabilistic classification on tabular data.
-  *scalability:* The approach must be able to scale to datasets with $>$ 10 Mio. samples. Due to the high trading activity and long data history, datasets may contain millions of samples, so classifiers must be able to handle large quantities of trades.
- *extensibility:* The approach must be extendable to train on partially-labelled trades. Most definitions of the trade initiator apply only to a subset of trades (e.g., certain order types), but excluded trades can still provide be valuable in training a classifier. The classifier must support training on unlabelled and labelled trades.

Trade classification, as we framed it, fits into supervised learning on tabular data, which is comprehensively covered by the research community with several studies reviewing and benchmarking newly proposed approaches against established machine learning methods.

**Shallow Tree-Based Ensembles**
Traditionally, tree-based ensembles, in particular gls-gbrt, have dominated modelling on tabular data with regard to predictive performance ([[@grinsztajnWhyTreebasedModels2022]]) and ([[@kadraWelltunedSimpleNets2021]]) and ([[@borisovDeepNeuralNetworks2022]]14). At its core, tree-based ensembles combine the estimates of individual decision trees into an ensemble to obtain a more accurate prediction. For gls-gbrt ([[@friedmanStochasticGradientBoosting2002]]) the ensemble is constructed by sequentially adding small-sized trees into the ensemble that improve upon the error of the previous trees.  Closely related to gradient-boosted trees are random forests (breiman / shappire paper?). Random forests ([[@breimanRandomForests2001]]) fuse decision trees with the bagging principle by growing deep decision trees on random subsets of data and aggregate the individual estimates. ([[@ronenMachineLearningTrade2022]]13--14) have unparalleled success in classifying trades through random forests. Due to the framing as a *probabilistic* classification task, random forests are not optimal. This is because decision trees yield poorly calibrated probability estimates, which carry into the ensemble ([[@tanhaSemisupervisedSelftrainingDecision2017]]356--360). Gradient boosting is unaffected by this problem, scales to large data set due to the availability of highly optimized implementations that approximate the construction of ensemble members, and is extensible to learn on unlabelled and labelled instances simultaneously. The state-of-the art performance in tabular classification tasks, together with its ability to scale and extend, makes it a candidate for trade classification.

**Deep Neural Networks**
The dominance of of gls-gbrt for tabular modelling is excelled by neural networks with several published works claiming to outperform gradient-boosted trees. In absence of unified benchmarks or common training, tuning and evaluation procedures, a full-scale overview is impossible. Instead, we focus on three main strands of research: regularized networks, differentiable trees and attention-based networks.

*Regularized Networks*
Among the simplest neural networks are gls-mlp, that consists of multiple linear layers with non-linear activation functions in-between. ([[@kadraWelltunedSimpleNets2021]]9--10) advocate for the use of vanilla gls-ffn with an extensive mix of regularization techniques, such as dropout ([[@srivastavaDropoutSimpleWay]]), residual connections ([[@heDeepResidualLearning2015]]) or weight decay, over complex, tabular-specific deep learning architectures or gradient-boosted trees. Regularization is expected to enhance generalization performance, but the benefit is non-exclusive to gls-mlp. Conversely, when regularization is equally applied to tabular specific architectures, the effect reverses and multiple works including ([[@gorishniyRevisitingDeepLearning2021]]7 or [[@grinsztajnWhyTreebasedModels2022]]5) report that regularized gls-ffn trail the performance of specialized architectures. As these results violates our performance criterion, we focus on specialized architectures, more specifically, differentiable learners and attention-based networks, but put emphasis on a careful regularisation and optimisation.

*Differentiable Trees*
Differentiable trees combine properties of neural networks and tree-based learners. In anticipation of cref-[[🎄Decision Trees]], standard decision trees are not differentiable and rely on local, greedy splitting procedures. On the other hand, neural networks, are trained in an end-to-end fashion using back-propagation. Differentiable trees become differentiable by using a soft splitting criterion within nodes of the tree, as proposed in (Hazimeh, Kontschieder, Popov). A frequently benchmarked variant of this family is the NODE network ([[@popovNeuralObliviousDecision2019]]3--5), which uses oblivious decision trees (trees, that use the same splitting criterion for all nodes at a single level) and uses entmax (Peters; function which maps a vector of real-valued scores to a discrete probability distribution) to perform soft splits and combines trees as layers in a neural network. NODE delivers performance on-par with gls-gbt in the author's experiments ([[@popovNeuralObliviousDecision2019]]7). The success of NODE is not corroborated by independent studies. In ([[@kadraWelltunedSimpleNets2021]]7) falls short to achieve the performance of simple, regularized networks. ([[@gorishniyRevisitingDeepLearning2021]]7) and ([[@borisovDeepNeuralNetworks2022]]14) demonstrate, that NODE is inferior to attention-based architectures. Hence, our focus shifts towards attention-based networks to perform trade classification.

*Attention-Based Networks*
An ever-growing strand of research focuses on neural networks with an attention mechanism to learn relationships between features or between features and samples. These includes architectures like, *TabNet* ([[@arikTabnetAttentiveInterpretable2020]]), *TabTransformer* ([[@huangTabTransformerTabularData2020]]2--3), *SAINT* ([[@somepalliSaintImprovedNeural2021]]), *Non-Parametric Transformer* ([[@kossenSelfAttentionDatapointsGoing2021]]3--4)  and *FT-Transformer* ([[@gorishniyRevisitingDeepLearning2021]]4--5). *TabNet* ([[@arikTabnetAttentiveInterpretable2020]]3--5), fuses the concept of decision trees and attention. Similar to growing a decision tree, several sub-networks are used to process the input in a sequential, hierarchical fashion. Sequential attention, a variant of attention, is used to decide which features to select in each step. The output of *TabNet* is the aggregate of all sub-networks. Its poor performance in independent comparisons e.g., ([[@kadraWelltunedSimpleNets2021]]7) and ([[@gorishniyRevisitingDeepLearning2021]]7), raises doubts about its usefulness. *SAINT* uses a specialized attention mechanism, the *intersample attention*, which performs attention over both columns and rows ([[@somepalliSaintImprovedNeural2021]]4--5). Applied to our setting, the model would contextualize information from the trade itself, but also from neighbouring trades, which would be an unfair advantage over classical trade classification rules. Similarly, the *Non-Parametric Transformer* of ([[@kossenSelfAttentionDatapointsGoing2021]]3--4) uses the entire data set as a context, which rules out the application in our work. Differently, *TabTransformer* ([[@huangTabTransformerTabularData2020]]2--3) performs attention per sample on categorical features-only. All numerical features are processed in a separate stream, which breaks correlations between categorical and numerical features ([[@somepalliSaintImprovedNeural2021]]2). Most importantly though, most features in trade datasets are numerical. As such, trade classification would hardly profit from the Transformer architecture, causing the model to collapse to a vanilla gls-MLP. A more comprehensive approach is provided by ([[@gorishniyRevisitingDeepLearning2021]]4--5) in the form *FT-Transformer*, which is a Transformer-based architecture, that processes both numerical inputs and categorical input in the Transformer blocks. Since it achieved state-of-the-art performance in several empirical studies, like ([[@grinsztajnWhyTreebasedModels2022]]5),  we further consider FT-Transformer for our empirical study. Being based on the Transformer architecture, FT-Transformer *naturally* scales to large amounts of data and can utilize unlabelled data through self-training procedures. 

The findings ([[@ronenMachineLearningTrade2022]]50) do not support the use of neural networks in trade classification. But due to the lack of details regarding the model architecture, regularization techniques, and training insights, it is necessary to reevaluate these findings in the context of option markets.
To summarize, our study considers gradient boosting and the FT-Transformer, each trained on labelled or partially labelled trades. This comparison is particularly appealing, as it enables a multi-faceted comparison of wide tree based ensembles versus deep neural networks, as well as supervised versus semi-supervised methods.

#gbm #transformer #supervised-learning #deep-learning 

**Notes:**
[[🍪Selection of semisupervised Approaches notes]]
