references/obsidian/📖chapters/🏅Feature importance results.md, before:

**Attention Maps:**

![[attention_maps_ise.png]]

**SAGE**
```python
    fg_classical = {
        'chg_all_lead (grouped)': ['price_all_lead', 'chg_all_lead'],
        'chg_all_lag (grouped)': ['price_all_lag', 'chg_ex_lag'],
        'chg_ex_lead (grouped)': ['price_ex_lead', 'chg_ex_lead', 'chg_all_lag'],
        'chg_ex_lag (grouped)': ['price_ex_lag'],
        'quote_best (grouped)': ['BEST_ASK', 'BEST_BID', 'prox_best'],
        'quote_ex (grouped)': ['bid_ex', 'ask_ex','prox_ex' ],
        'TRADE_PRICE': ['TRADE_PRICE'],
        }
    
    fg_size = {'size_ex (grouped)': [ 'bid_ask_size_ratio_ex', 'rel_bid_size_ex',  'rel_ask_size_ex', 'bid_size_ex', 'ask_size_ex','depth_ex'], 'TRADE_SIZE': ['TRADE_SIZE']}
    
    fg_ml = {
        "STRK_PRC": ["STRK_PRC"],
        "ttm": ["ttm"],
        "option_type": ["option_type"],
        "root":["root"],
        "myn":["myn"],
        "day_vol":["day_vol"], 
        "issue_type":["issue_type"],
    }
```

- emphasize that these are global feature attributions
- explain definition of feature groups -> Limitation of implementation. Classical classifier sees only a fraction of all features, but features are inherently redundant. -> groups  are aimed to be mutually exclusive
- configuration
	- explain how sampling is done? Why is sampling even necessary. -> Calculating SAGE values is computationally intensive. Recommended sample size is 1024. We tested different sample sizes. Results stabilize at 2048. We set the sample size to 2048.
	- why zero-one loss and why not cross-entropy loss? -> penalize trade classification rules for over-confident predictions
- visualize in subplots how feature importances align (3x3 (benchmark, gbm, fttransformer), distinguished by feature set)
- What features are important?
	- Are there particularly dominant feature groups?
	- How does it align with literature?
	- Are features that are important in smaller feature sets also important in larger feature sets?
	- How does adding more features influence the impact of the other features?
	- Which ones are unimportant? Do models omit features that perform poorly in the empirical setting?
	- Are features important that have not been considered yet? Why's that?
- interpretation
	- Why are size-related features so important? Can we confirm the limit order theory? 

Results:
![[results-sage.png]]
- **Classical Rules** Results align with intuition. Largest improvements come from applying the quote rule (nbbo), which requires quote_best + Trade price, quote (ex) is only applied to a fraction of all trades. The rev tick test is of hardly any importance, as it does not affect classification rules much, nor is it applied often



**Token Embeddings:**
(see graphs)



![[informative-uniformative-features.png]]
([[@grinsztajnWhyTreebasedModels2022]])

**Attention**
- emphasize that these are local feature attributions
- Visualize attention for some trades
- interpret pattern. How does it align with the feature importances from SAGE?

**Rank correlation between approaches**
Compare different feature attributions:
![[feature_attributions_from_attention.png]]
(Found in [[@borisovDeepNeuralNetworks2022]])

Commit message:

Add commentary on categorical embeddings🧙

references/obsidian/📖chapters/🏅Feature importance results.md, after:


**Categorical Embeddings**
For the Transformer we know from cref-chapter, that embeddings can capture similarities by arranging related objects closer in embedding space. Visualising the learnt embeddings gives additional insights into the model.

The embeddings are queried from the feature tokenizer in FT-Transformer. The similarity between embeddings is measured by cosine distance in embedding space. The high dimensional embeddings are then projected into 2D-space using $t$-SNE ([[@vandermaatenVisualizingDataUsing2008]]). As straight-forward to interpret, we restrict our analysis to the underlying ($\mathtt{ROOT}$), but note, that it is applicable to any numerical and categorical embeddings. 

Figure cref-jpm illustrates the embeddings exemplary for $\mathtt{SPY}$ and $\mathtt{JPM}$. -(As our analysis is restricted to two arbitrary underlyings, we encourage the reader to use our interactive visualisation (https://wandb.ai/fbv/thesis/runs/3cirr6nk) for further exploration. ) For SPY todo-(wait for list of underlyings) For JPM todo-(wait for list of underlyings)

![[embeddings-spy-jpm.png]]

However, we want to stress the limitations. Both underlyings are among the most frequently traded in our dataset. For infrequent underlyings, embedding are likely close to their random initialisation and hence not meaningful, as no parameter updates takes place. The described problem transfers to handling rare vocabulary items, intensively studied in the context of natural language processing.

**Attention Maps:**

![[attention_maps_ise.png]]

**SAGE**
```python
    fg_classical = {
        'chg_all_lead (grouped)': ['price_all_lead', 'chg_all_lead'],
        'chg_all_lag (grouped)': ['price_all_lag', 'chg_ex_lag'],
        'chg_ex_lead (grouped)': ['price_ex_lead', 'chg_ex_lead', 'chg_all_lag'],
        'chg_ex_lag (grouped)': ['price_ex_lag'],
        'quote_best (grouped)': ['BEST_ASK', 'BEST_BID', 'prox_best'],
        'quote_ex (grouped)': ['bid_ex', 'ask_ex','prox_ex' ],
        'TRADE_PRICE': ['TRADE_PRICE'],
        }
    
    fg_size = {'size_ex (grouped)': [ 'bid_ask_size_ratio_ex', 'rel_bid_size_ex',  'rel_ask_size_ex', 'bid_size_ex', 'ask_size_ex','depth_ex'], 'TRADE_SIZE': ['TRADE_SIZE']}
    
    fg_ml = {
        "STRK_PRC": ["STRK_PRC"],
        "ttm": ["ttm"],
        "option_type": ["option_type"],
        "root":["root"],
        "myn":["myn"],
        "day_vol":["day_vol"], 
        "issue_type":["issue_type"],
    }
```

- emphasize that these are global feature attributions
- explain definition of feature groups -> Limitation of implementation. Classical classifier sees only a fraction of all features, but features are inherently redundant. -> groups  are aimed to be mutually exclusive
- configuration
	- explain how sampling is done? Why is sampling even necessary. -> Calculating SAGE values is computationally intensive. Recommended sample size is 1024. We tested different sample sizes. Results stabilize at 2048. We set the sample size to 2048.
	- why zero-one loss and why not cross-entropy loss? -> penalize trade classification rules for over-confident predictions
- visualize in subplots how feature importances align (3x3 (benchmark, gbm, fttransformer), distinguished by feature set)
- What features are important?
	- Are there particularly dominant feature groups?
	- How does it align with literature?
	- Are features that are important in smaller feature sets also important in larger feature sets?
	- How does adding more features influence the impact of the other features?
	- Which ones are unimportant? Do models omit features that perform poorly in the empirical setting?
	- Are features important that have not been considered yet? Why's that?
- interpretation
	- Why are size-related features so important? Can we confirm the limit order theory? 

Results:
![[results-sage.png]]
- **Classical Rules** Results align with intuition. Largest improvements come from applying the quote rule (nbbo), which requires quote_best + Trade price, quote (ex) is only applied to a fraction of all trades. The rev tick test is of hardly any importance, as it does not affect classification rules much, nor is it applied often



**Token Embeddings:**
(see graphs)



![[informative-uniformative-features.png]]
([[@grinsztajnWhyTreebasedModels2022]])

**Attention**
- emphasize that these are local feature attributions
- Visualize attention for some trades
- interpret pattern. How does it align with the feature importances from SAGE?

**Rank correlation between approaches**
Compare different feature attributions:
![[feature_attributions_from_attention.png]]
(Found in [[@borisovDeepNeuralNetworks2022]])
