
title: Trades, quotes, inventories, and information
authors: Joel Hasbrouck
year: 1988
tags : #trade-classification #quote-rule #tick-rule 
status : #📥
related:
- [[@holthausenEffectLargeBlock1987]] (similar paper + similar time)
## Notes
- Authors discusses quote rule, where trades are classified as seller or buyer-iniated by comparing against the current quote.
- Hasbrouck can classify 85 % of the trades. Due to the limitation of the quote rule, transactions at the midpoint can not be classified.
- He gives the following reasons for midpoint transactions:
	- market buy and sell orders exist simultaneously. A leeway of the broker is a possible reason for this. Market orders might get crossed. Normally, a sell order must be made above the bid plus some fraction. 
	- Market makers better the current quote to respond to a traders' inquiry.  Microstructure usually assume that the posted quotes reflect the market maker's demand and don't allow for change.
- He gives "crude rules" to still classify midpoint transactions:
	- Infer buy / sell classification from another transaction at the quote price.
	- Classify midpoint transaction as *de facto* quote based on the subsequent transaction. 
	- Use subsequent quote reversion. When quote revision immediately follows a midpoint transaction the order type is inferred from the direction of the revision. Here, the site **opposite to (hence reverse)** the direction of the quotes (e. g. increase in quotes) following the midpoint transaction is used to classify the midpoint transaction.

## Annotations

“The reported values are the proportion of transactions and proportion of trade volume classified as buy or sell using the indicated rule. Classifications made by the preceding quote are those in which the transaction price is at or outside the prevailing bid or ask. The remaining rules deal with cases in which the reported transaction price is between the prevailing quotes. Using the contemporaneous transaction rule, when a midpoint transaction is found to be contemporaneous with a transaction at a quote, the buy/sell classification of the latter is applied to the former. Using the subseque.it transaction role, when a transaction at a posted quote occurs subsequent to a midpoint transaction, but prior to a quote revision, the midpoint is taken as the de fcto quote. Using the subsequent quote revision rule, when quote revision immediately follows a midpoint transaction, the order type is inferred from the direction of the quote revision.” ([Hasbrouck, 1988, p. 12](zotero://select/library/items/YVX8ZTJ8)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F954MPA7?page=12&annotation=T9CKH3Q8))

“The model described here is one of a market-maker who sets take-it-orleave-it quotes and traders who trade against these quotes. In this framework, a trade can easily be classified as a buy or sell order hy reference to the current quotes. The proportion of trades and trading volumes that can be classified in this fashion for the current data set is reported in table 1 . Roughly $85 \%$ of the transactions can be so classified.  
The substantial remainder consists of transactions occurring at the midpoint of the current quotes. (The most common situation involves a bid-ask spread of $\frac{1}{4}$ and a transaction on the middle $\frac{1}{8}$ th.) Although the present model does not allow for midpoint transactions, they are clearly an important consideration.  
Midpoint transactions can arise in several situations. The most benign occurs when market buy and sell orders exist simultaneously. A Market orders may not be exccuted instantly. . . Lour broker acting as agent for a public customer may have some leeway in presenting the order to the specialist and other floor brokers. This leads to the possibility that market buy and sell orders will exist at the same time. Under exchange rules, the buy order must be presented at one minimum fractior (generally $\frac{1}{8}$ ) below the current ask and the sell order must be presented at one minimum fraction above the current bid. When these prices coincide, the orders are crossed at the quose midpoint. For the present purposes, the crossing of public orders is essentially immaterial: there is no effect on market-maker inventory and no information can be inferred from two ofisetting orders. Unfortunately, at no time did I observe such simultaneous existence of orders and discussions with a specialist confirmed that such events are relatively rare.  
More often, the midpoint transaction arises when the specialist or floor trader responds to a broker's inquiry by bettering the current quote. Suppose, for example, that the quotes currently stand at $\left(20,20 \frac{1}{4}\right)$, but when a trader presents a buy order at $20 \frac{1}{8}$, the market-maker accepts it. Microstructure models typically assume that the posted quótes accurately reflect the marketmaker's demand function, and do not permit this behaviour. In these situations, it appears that the market-maker benefits from concealing his actual propensity to trade.  
A though no clear-cut rules help the researchers classify midpoint transactiuns in these cases some considerations offer partial relief. These admittedly crude ruies are described below, and the proportions of transactions classified are reported in table 1.  
1\. Contemporanevus Transaction. 1 occasionally observed that when a midpoint transaction occurs it represents only a portion of the total order size, with the remainder being filled at the quoted price. Within this data set, therefore, when a mickoint transaeticn is found to be contemporaneous with a transaction at a quote price, the buy/sell classification of the latter is applied to the former.  
2\. Subsequent Transaction. When a transaction at a posted quote occurs after a midpoint transaction, but before a quote revision, the midpoint is taken as the de facto quote. For example, if the current quotes are (bid, ask) $\left(20,20 \frac{1}{4}\right.$ ) and a midpoint transaction occurs (at $20 \frac{1}{8}$ ), and if a later transaction occurs at $20 \frac{1}{4}$ (a buy), then $20 \frac{1}{8}$ is takeri as the de facto bid quote and the midpoint transaction is considered a saie.  
3\. Subsequent Quote Revision. When quote revision immediately follows a midpoint transaction the order type is inferred from the direction of the revision. In this view, a midpoint transaction indicates the de facto quote by marking the side of the market opposite the direction of the movement. Take, for example, current quotes at $\left(20,20 \frac{1}{4}\right)$, a midpoint transaction at $20 \frac{1}{8}$, followed by new quotes $?^2\left(20 \frac{1}{8}, 20 \frac{3}{8}\right)$. The midpoint transaction is classed as a sell, with the interpretation that the seller is unwilling to meet the currently posted bid quote, necessitating an upward revision.  
Since this classification scheme uses subsequent quotes to determine trade sign, it causes a spurious relation between trades and subsequent quote revisions, which will be confounded with the actual effect. Accordingly, $z_z$ based on the above classification scheme were used only in the univariate time-series analysis of trade behaviour. In the bivariate trade/quote revision analyses, trades were classified solely on the basis of preceding quotes.” ([Hasbrouck, 1988, p. 12](zotero://select/library/items/YVX8ZTJ8)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F954MPA7?page=12&annotation=5YE35L42))

“AhhO no clear-cut rules help the tiWs in cases some considerations offer p” ([Hasbrouck, 1988, p. 13](zotero://select/library/items/YVX8ZTJ8)) ([pdf](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/F954MPA7?page=13&annotation=BGLRGJZX))