references/obsidian/📥Inbox/@olbrysEvaluatingTradeSide2018.md, before:

---
title: Evaluating Trade Side Classification Algorithms Using Intraday Data from the Warsaw Stock Exchange
authors: Joanna Olbrys, Michał Mursztyn
year: 2017
---

“Trade side classification algorithms enable us to assign the side that initiates a transaction and to distinguish between the so-called buyer- and seller-initiated trades.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 1)

“The main motivation for this study is growing interest in market liquidity, dimensions of liquidity, and commonality in liquidity that has emerged in the literature over the recent years.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 2)

“Moreover, to calculate several liquidity/illiquidity proxies using intraday data, it is essential to recognize the side initiating the transaction and to distinguish between the so-called buyer- and seller-initiated trades.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 2)

“The literature provides many alternative measures of stock market liquidity/illiquidity based on intraday data (e.g. Chordia et al, 2002, 2005; Goyenko et al, 2009; Ranaldo, 2001; Stoll, 2000; von Wyss, 2004; Nowak, 2017; Olbryś and Mursztyn, 2017a).” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 2)

“The Warsaw Stock Exchange (WSE) is an order-driven market with an electronic order book, but information of the best bid and ask price is not made public.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 2)

“As a consequence, the researchers rely on indirect trade classification rules to infer trade sides.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 3)

“To verify the robustness of the obtained results, the comparison of trade side classification rules is provided both in the whole sample from January 3, 2005 to December 30, 2016 (3005 trading days) and over three adjacent sub-periods, each of equal size (436 trading days; see Olbryś and Mursztyn, 2015)” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 3)

“For example, the so-called “immediacy” definition describes initiators as traders who demand immediate execution (e.g. Lee and Radhakrishna, 2000). According to Odders-White (2000), the initiator of a transaction is the investor (buyer or seller) who placed his/her order last, chronologically (the so called “chronological” definition)” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 4)

“There are quite many trade side classification procedures proposed in the literature: the quote rule, the at the quote rule, the revised quote rule, the tick rule, the reverse tick rule, the LR algorithm, the revised LR algorithm, the EMO algorithm, and the Bulk Volume Classification methodology (BVC). We will describe the content of each classification rule as follows:” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 4)

“Andersen and Bondarenko (2015)” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 5)

“Trade classification algorithms are commonly used to generate estimates of market liquidity measures. Among others, Chan and Fong (2000) examine the significance of the number of trades, size of trades, and order imbalance (buyer- versus seller-initiated trades) in explaining the volatility-volume relation for a sample of NYSE and NASDAQ stocks.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 7)

“The second strand concerns various versions of bid-ask spread and other transaction costs.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 7)

“The next strand of the literature regards short sales.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 8)

“The empirical experiments show that the Lee and Ready algorithm performs better then other procedures on the WSE (see Table 5), which is consistent with the literature. Moreover, the robustness analysis reveals that the empirical findings turn out to be robust to the choice of the sample and rather do not depend on firm size.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 14)

Commit message:

Added thoughts on GBM and Transformer 🤖

references/obsidian/📥Inbox/@olbrysEvaluatingTradeSide2018.md, after:

---
title: Evaluating Trade Side Classification Algorithms Using Intraday Data from the Warsaw Stock Exchange
authors: Joanna Olbrys, Michał Mursztyn
year: 2017
---

“Trade side classification algorithms enable us to assign the side that initiates a transaction and to distinguish between the so-called buyer- and seller-initiated trades.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 1)

“The main motivation for this study is growing interest in market liquidity, dimensions of liquidity, and commonality in liquidity that has emerged in the literature over the recent years.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 2)

“Moreover, to calculate several liquidity/illiquidity proxies using intraday data, it is essential to recognize the side initiating the transaction and to distinguish between the so-called buyer- and seller-initiated trades.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 2)

“The literature provides many alternative measures of stock market liquidity/illiquidity based on intraday data (e.g. Chordia et al, 2002, 2005; Goyenko et al, 2009; Ranaldo, 2001; Stoll, 2000; von Wyss, 2004; Nowak, 2017; Olbryś and Mursztyn, 2017a).” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 2)

“The Warsaw Stock Exchange (WSE) is an order-driven market with an electronic order book, but information of the best bid and ask price is not made public.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 2)

“As a consequence, the researchers rely on indirect trade classification rules to infer trade sides.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 3)

“To verify the robustness of the obtained results, the comparison of trade side classification rules is provided both in the whole sample from January 3, 2005 to December 30, 2016 (3005 trading days) and over three adjacent sub-periods, each of equal size (436 trading days; see Olbryś and Mursztyn, 2015)”[[@huangTabTransformerTabularData2020]] (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 3)

“For example, the so-called “immediacy” definition describes initiators as traders who demand immediate execution (e.g. Lee and Radhakrishna, 2000). According to Odders-White (2000), the initiator of a transaction is the investor (buyer or seller) who placed his/her order last, chronologically (the so called “chronological” definition)” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 4)

“There are quite many trade side classification procedures proposed in the literature: the quote rule, the at the quote rule, the revised quote rule, the tick rule, the reverse tick rule, the LR algorithm, the revised LR algorithm, the EMO algorithm, and the Bulk Volume Classification methodology (BVC). We will describe the content of each classification rule as follows:” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 4)

“Andersen and Bondarenko (2015)” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 5)

“Trade classification algorithms are commonly used to generate estimates of market liquidity measures. Among others, Chan and Fong (2000) examine the significance of the number of trades, size of trades, and order imbalance (buyer- versus seller-initiated trades) in explaining the volatility-volume relation for a sample of NYSE and NASDAQ stocks.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 7)

“The second strand concerns various versions of bid-ask spread and other transaction costs.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 7)

“The next strand of the literature regards short sales.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 8)

“The empirical experiments show that the Lee and Ready algorithm performs better then other procedures on the WSE (see Table 5), which is consistent with the literature. Moreover, the robustness analysis reveals that the empirical findings turn out to be robust to the choice of the sample and rather do not depend on firm size.” (Olbrys and Mursztyn, 2018, p. 14)
